Introducing an Empowering Path to Embodied Self-Awareness

The unique beauty of the Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD) mind is that it holds a remarkable energy. A
Neurodivergent individual is acutely aware of their differences
energetically, physically, emotionally, and mentally, and their acute
sensitivity to sensory experiences and stimuli gives them a remarkable
view of the world. There are moments in which ADHDers feel confident,
productive, and inspired, and hyperfocus presents as a creative flow.
Conversely, there is the duality in which ADHDers feel lost, exhausted,
insecure, and overwhelmed with paralyses and inaction. One of the
greatest difficulties expressed by ADHDers is the expectation of having to
repeat your best day.
This book uses brain science to promote embodied self-awareness and
a sense of safety and connection to help understand how ADHDers can
navigate best their world.
Let’s begin a journey of learning with an experiential glimpse of
ADHD with the following vignette from my own experience.
One of the greatest gifts of a neurodivergent mind is the ability to
experience feelings at a depth that is rarely experienced by the
neurotypical mainstream. Something as simple as a hug with someone
you love, a deep conversation, or an experience in nature can light up
your soul and bring absolute peace and happiness. Pure love and joy in
its simplest form. Conversely, the somewhat cruel opposing pattern is
to feel completely lost, abandoned, hurt, sad or lonely due to seemingly
simple things, such as a perceived critical comment from someone you
care about or feeling like you have let someone down. The depth of
feelings creates incredible experiences and beautiful connections but
also leads to pain and sadness that feel like a part of you is literally
pulled out. Rarely can a neurotypical way of thinking relate to the
depth of these feelings relative to the experiences that seem apparent.
The neurodivergent individual knows the logic and the rational
emotion that should be appropriate for the situation, but the depth of
the feeling remains. It is both a beautiful and painful place to exist but
offers the full spectrum of human emotions and experiences rather
than the safety and predictability of the emotional middle ground. Not
good, not bad, just different.
Most adult ADHD clients report having spent years navigating the mental
health care system with little success due to treatment methods that are
not designed to meet the neurocognitive needs of neurodivergent minds.
The discipline of psychology is evolving, however, with a move away from
the idea that people need to meet neuro-normative expectations in order
to succeed in life. The application of a neuro-affirming approach in
clinical and counselling practice embraces the many strengths and beauty
of neurodivergence and its different manifestations of thinking. When
we can come to accept ourselves, we can remove the mask that makes us
feel hidden, rejected, and disconnected. If a person is genuinely proud of
who they are, it helps them to navigate the world better. A great tragedy
is going through life disconnected from our brilliant minds because we see
the self as broken.

The ADHD Safe Path includes powerful concepts
that form a roadmap for minimising the impact of roadblocks on ADHD
people. The chapters that follow explore aspects of that path to help the
reader with a neurobiologically informed understanding of navigating the
world with embodied self-awareness, and an associated sense of safety
and connection (to feel regulated and related).