Balancing Emotional and Intuitive Thought Processing
Our brain is a powerful processor of a wealth of inputs from within
and without our bodies. We see, hear, smell, and feel the things
around us, as well as remember our past, imagine our future, and
respond to messages informing us about the state of our major organs via
our nervous system. Complex neural networks within our gut and heart
create their own mini nervous systems and exchange regulatory neuronal
signals with the brain. Some of this processing occurs subconsciously as
our brain constantly monitors and manages a range of basic physiological
functions essential for the maintenance of life.
Because our brain does so much of this ‘automatic’ processing to
enable us to function in our world, we have a lot of time for conscious
thinking about many things, including what we do next. Our brain gives
us the ability to identify patterns, which helps us make sense of the world
and use logic and reasoning to make informed decisions. However, even
this cognitive processing still makes use of the myriad of sensory signals
coming into the brain, thus affecting mood, cognition and behaviour. For
example, when we feel a sudden quickened heart rate, it registers in our
consciousness that something has changed about our current mental and
physical state. Did the heart quicken in response to our cognitions or
some physical action? If we then think about which answer it might be, we
are further influencing those states and the mental processing about them.
We might remember another time when our heart suddenly started
beating faster. This memory may trigger positive or negative thoughts,
leading to further mental processing. All this thinking can get us into and
out of trouble.
If we get stuck in our heads, relying on the cognitive brain alone to
interpret our life experiences, we can get caught in a cycle of thinking
patterns that prevent us from moving forward. The challenge, then, is to
maintain a balanced connection between emotional and intuitive
processing so that our bodies can function optimally and we can make
informed decisions. This helps not just in better decision-making but also
in better mental health and wellbeing.
Emotional processing is all about ‘following our heart’. It centres on a
feeling of deep emotions and values. We may fail to listen to our heart
and pursue things we don’t desire or feel wrong about. It is important to
check in with what feels true to us (that is, what we want and value) otherwise
we may think of others above ourselves. For example, a feeling of social
anxiety may lead us to self-sabotage (such as, act in a subservient, approval-
seeking, or self-deprecating way) just to fit in.
Intuitive processing is all about your ‘gut instincts’— a source of self-
protection. This is where our past experiences, urges, and strong feelings
converge. It can offer insights that normal processing may be unable to
comprehend. For example, ignoring our intuition can put us at odds with
our sense of safety or identity (that is, who we truly are). Intentionally tuning
in to our instincts often requires quietening the mind (for instance, resisting the
urge to continually return to logistical reasoning) and remembering that
our feelings will pass. Instinctive reflections of past patterns can help us
shift towards healthier choices. For example, when we ignore our
intuition, we may not consider intuitive flashes that help guide us to a
more purposeful direction (such as, our valued direction in life).


The following vignette depicts acknowledgement of 
emotional processing in pursuing a chosen career path.
My parents convinced me with logistical reasoning to study law.
However, my heart was never truly in it. Over time the resistance to
pursuing something that was not intrinsically interesting to me
resulted in low mood. I became unwell when I tried to suppress my
feelings and engaged in emotional eating as a form of self-medicating.
I connected with a course coordinator who helped me to consider roles
that were more aligned with my heart’s content. I was able to use my
skills to pivot towards mediation training courses, which instinctually
felt more aligned with my interests.

Here is a vignette depicting intutive processing in decision making.
When it came time to move out of our share house, my housemate
asked me if we could find another place together. My reasoning told me
that it was not a good idea as I did not feel we were a good fit, and I did
not want to live together again. When it came to having the
conversation and saying no, I felt bad for how the decision was going
to make that person feel. I tried to convince myself that things could be
different, and my body responded with anxiety and stress. My gut was
trying to tell me to protect myself and say no. I listened to my instinct
and reminded myself that my regard for other people does not equate
to always doing what they need. It’s about regarding oneself whilst also
maintaining compassion for others. I am learning to show up for
myself, like I do for other people.

Here is a vignette that demonstrates emotional processing, in order to move beyond
feelings of imposter synderome:
I was experiencing imposter syndrome at the thought of starting a new
role at my workplace. I feared being found out for not knowing
something or making a mistake and people perceiving me as
incompetent. The workplace no longer felt like a safe space. I felt
anxious and overwhelmed. My mind was stuck in a loop of questioning
if I was the right person for the job. When I pivoted away from my
conscious thoughts to allow myself space to process my emotions and
check in with my gut instincts, I knew deep down that I could trust in
my abilities. I may not be all-knowing; however, I am curious and
considered in my approach to learning and excellent at problem-
solving. Metaphorically, when there is a storm of problems that need
solving at work, I am usually the one who can dance in the rain. 


When making decisions, it can be helpful to tease apart instincts from
thoughts and feelings as a practical task:

Step 1: Intentionally tune into your instinctual awareness of what the
next step forward is (such as, the action of what you want to try next).

Step 2: Rationalise how you will go about putting the plan of action
into practice (with logistical reasoning and planning).

Step 3: Then consider how you feel about actioning the valued
direction. When considering how you feel it is important to create space for emotions
in order to process them. Thoughts that stem from
emotional overwhelm, often present as feeling stuck in the form of: 
avoidance (such as, procrastination) or emotional reasoning, a thinking 
distortion in which you assume if you feel a certain way then it must be true
(such as, a feeling of imposter syndrome holding you back
from trying anything new).

Consider the following questions to increase a sense of self-awareness and encourage
better integration of emotional and intuitive processing. 

What is my logistical reasoning telling me (that is my, rational thinking)?

Am I feeling caught up in past narratives of self-doubt? 

What do I feel?

Does this feel true to me? Is it aligned with who I am and what I
value?

Have I considered what I need? Have I articulated my needs? 

What are my gut instincts telling me (that is, to consider my intuition 
as a source of experience and cues of safety)?

Am I setting healthy boundaries?

Is my compassion for others incapacitating my ability to show up for
myself? If so, how can I show up for myself whilst remaining
compassionate to others (such as, compassionately acknowledging their emotion
rather than trying to appease at the expense of myself)?

If someone has crossed my boundary, am I ignoring my needs or
gut instinct by justifying why they may have treated me that way?
If so, does that feel like a healthy perspective? Do I need to re-
establish my boundaries?

Have I prioritised my time and energy to self-invest in doing the
things that I like and that nourish me? 

Here is a vignette that demonstrates that setting healthy boundaries can be 
physical, mental, emotional or time-based. 
When I am making decisions, my mind will consider the values I
hold true. I enjoy helping people navigate difficult situations and
adding value. I have an ability to see the big picture, which allows me to pre-
emptively solve any potential problems that may arise. I want to do
right by other people, and I will go to great lengths to consider the
possible impacts of my actions. Ultimately, I have a desire to make a 
positive impact in this world. Whilst I am proud of the person that I am, 
I am learning that it is not healthy for me to help other people
at the expense of myself, as it will eventuate in my body feeling
under resourced and result in me feeling too tired to care for myself. 


Step 4: Putting it all together. A balanced perspective allows you to consider the rational
analyses (that is, logistical reasoning and planning), 
the emotional resonance (that is, processing feelings that show up), 
and intuitive processing (that is, our instinctual awareness).

The following vignette demonstrates implementing a plan of action to reach one's goal.
Instinctively, I have decided that it is in my best interest to buy a house.
My rational mind tells me that I would need to set aside money each
week to reach my financial goal of saving for a deposit. When I attempt
to do so, I feel like a failure for getting myself into debt. My emotional
overwhelm makes me feel like this goal is out of reach for someone like
me and that I might as well give in and spend my money. To process a
fear of failure, I applied self-compassionate thinking. I reminded
myself that I have learnt what triggered my past behaviour of impulsive
spending, and I have worked hard to be more in tune with my mind.
My gut instinct tells me that the next step forward is to automate direct
deposits into a secure bank account that I cannot access until I am ready to
buy a house. My wise thinking and instinctual awareness are allowing
me to reach my valued direction.

The following vignette depicts an instinctual urge to self-protect whilst
also trusting in one’s ability to be open to connection.
I feel sad and lonely, and I know that I want more social connection
in my life. My initial urge is to avoid people due to past patterns of getting hurt. 
As a child, I believed that being a good person would lead to others being
good in return. That was not the case. I was chronically bullied at
school. My relationships were cultivated based on what others wanted,
and I lost a sense of who I was. I became adept at reading even the
slightest shifts in people’s moods and adjusting my behaviour
accordingly to avoid attracting blame or shame.
I have shifted that paradigm as an adult. I cannot always be responsible
for placating and pleasing others. Logistically, I know that if I am
rejected for being myself or setting healthy boundaries, I have learnt to
hold the line of authenticity (that is to, do what feels right to me) as it
cultivates a true sense of belonging. Happiness is to be accepted for
who you are. As the saying goes, in being uniquely you, the wrong
people will leave the party, and the right ones will join the dance. I now
know that when you are surrounded by healthy people, they will
correct you towards healthy behaviours, they will value your time,
enjoy seeing you succeed and encourage you to nurture yourself. I am
engaging in pursuing my hobbies, and instinctively I feel ready to
connect with people via shared interests.

Recall that when our fears are holding us back from engaging in things that 
feel personally meaningful to us, it is important to create space to 
process our feelings and intentionally tune into our instinctual awareness 
as a source of wisdom. You will likely need to intentionally move past your thoughts and emotions
(that is, processing the feelings and not continually returning to
thoughts of self-doubt) to reach your instincts. We need to turn down 
the noise that can distract us from what our intuition knows to be true.
An inability to integrate our emotional and intuitive processing with our mental reasoning 
allows for a balanced perspective to move towards our valued directions (such as, approaching
new challenges, desired outcomes, task engagement, and building upon 
genuine connection with ourselves and others).

 
