ADHD Fatigue
An ADHD brain is not wired the same way as a non-ADHD brain.
Research continues to show specific differences in the ADHD
brain’s structure, function and chemistry which create significant
differences in how ADHDers navigate the world. While a neurotypical
brain is wired to intuitively tune out environmental distractors, control
impulses and sustain attention, many of the mechanisms required to do
those things are dysregulated in ADHD. ADHDers can become overstimulated because of the way their
brain filters sensory input (that is, what your brain pays attention too or filters
out). The mental effort required to filter out background noise can be
exhausting for ADHDers. Fatigue is a common clinical feature of
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in adulthood.
In one study researchers measured participants responses to a visual
stimulus and found that ADHD participants were not filtering visual
input to focus solely on the digits as instructed, rather their brains were
paying attention to all the visual input presented on the screen. More specifically, the researchers reported that ADHD participants
had 138% more ‘background noise’ in the brain (specifically, a patten
electroretinogram measured retinal functions in both eyes) compared to
the control group. A further study concluded similar finding using
magnetic resonance imaging data showing that all regions of the brain
associated with sensory processing revealed elevated activity. These findings indicate that elevated background noise is
associated with symptoms of inattention in ADHD and supports the use
of interventions that reduce noise and distractions.
Several types of sensory inputs can trigger overstimulation (for instance, tactile
sensations, auditory sensitivity, visual stimulation, strong smells, crowded
spaces). When an ADHDer experiences sensory overwhelm, physical
symptoms can present (such as, restlessness, fatigue, migraines, sleep concerns
and so on). Conversely, under-stimulation can occur when a person is not
receiving enough stimulation to keep them engaged, and may feel bored,
restless, or be drawn to seek out new stimuli. A state of shutdown may
result in hours of time passing (for example, a paralysed state of blankly staring at
the wall). Learning about your neurobiological needs helps you to engage
with the world in a way that feels safe and connected (that is, to feel regulated
and related). Mindful awareness can create a pressure valve, that allows
you to turn the volume down when the world is becoming too noisy (such as,
feeling everything all at once and a need for respite).
Fatigue can also be fuelled by logistical overwhelm (such as, co-ordinating daily
activities). The following vignette demonstrates the benefits of
streamlining and simplifying a routine to limit choice.
One of the difficulties associated with divergent thinking and time
blindness can be a perpetual pattern of being late. For example, my indecision
and tendency to wonder from room to room whilst getting distracted along
the way, was problematic. Streamlining the process by limiting choice
(that is, having my clothes in the bathroom readily set out and shoes and
bag ready at the door), and limiting myself to only entering one room
(in that, I would get dressed in bathroom and then leave the house) helped
me to stay on track. If it detoured from this plan in any way (for instance, allowing for a
coffee before I leave), it would eventuate in my mind wandering, and I would go
off track. Although it feels robotic (and I would not expect to be so monotonous on my days off) 
this routine, that limits choice and distraction, has made it so much easier to get myself out of
the house on time on my workdays.
Removing visual clutter and organising living and working space, can
help to make things more manageable. One of the goals of decluttering is
to set up the environment to reduce distractions. Occupational therapists
can support ADHDers by exploring strategies for improving executive
function with environmental modifications (for example, decluttering, utilising
visual schedules), and individualised systems (such as, assistive devices).
Overcommitting to things can lead to a state of exhaustion. ADHDers
are prone to overcommitting for several reasons. The information that
an ADHD brain is drawn to and the way in which information is
processed is significantly different to most people. Hyper empathy is a
common characteristic of ADHD that can result in increased awareness
of people’s underlying needs. ADHDers are drawn to helping others, and
shine brightly with their exceptional ability to do so. However, this can
often be at the expense of investing in the self. Rejection sensitive
dysphoria, in the form of not wanting to disappoint, can also be a factor.
The irony is however, that if you set an expectation of going above and
beyond, it will inevitably be unsustainable and ultimately lead to a self-
fulfilling cycle of disappointment. Learning to say no and set boundaries
is often a therapeutic goal when ADHDers seek professional help.
David’s vignette describes how helping others can become all
consuming.
I feel like my body is so easily switched into action when I help others.
I feel a great sense of pride when I have made a difference. Conversely,
I sometimes feel a sense of apathy when it comes to doing something
for myself. This pattern of being drawn to helping others can consume
me to the point of exhaustion and eventuate in a lack of energy to
pursue the things I want for myself.
Another reason for overcommitting is underestimating the time it will
take to do things. It is important to consider what priorities could be
ignored if you over commit (for example, self-care, personal goals) and
intentionally time block accordingly. A cycle of overcommitting to things
and the accumulative impact of overextending can lead to burnout.
ADHD burnout is characterised by pervasive exhaustion, loss of function
(that is, diminished capacity to cope with daily life), and reduced tolerance to
stimulus.
Setting healthy boundaries can be physical, mental, emotional and
time based. When we are faced with stressful situations in life, an inability
to integrate our emotional and intuitive processing with our mental
processing can create chronic stress and tension in the body.