A Pathway Towards Wholeness
— Jungian Shadow Work

Carl Jung articulated ‘The meeting with oneself is, at first, the meeting with
one’s shadow. One must learn to know oneself to know
who one is. A man who is possessed by his shadow is
always standing in his own light and falling into his own
traps… living below his own level’.

The personal shadow in Jungian psychology, refers to the unconscious aspects
of the personality. Carl Jung defined the collective unconscious as the repository of
inherited knowledge and experiences shared by a particular
culture or society (for example, universal inherited archetypes such as generational 
belief systems and social events and rituals performed across different cultures). 
Whereas, the personal unconscious is the repository of an individual’s personal
experiences (such as, memories, perceptions and personal beliefs). According to Jung,
your persona is the social mask you wear and present to the world. The
term originates from the Greek word for the masks that ancient actors
used, symbolising the roles people play in public. The persona is an
adaptation to the external world; through this adaptation, the
incompatible parts of oneself create what Jung called the personal shadow 
(a collection of repressed or disowned parts).
For instance, children have a biological need for safety and connection (that is, a need to feel a sense
of belonging), the social persona grows out of the need in childhood to adapt
to the expectations of others (that is, expectations of our parents, teachers
and peers). As children, we act on impulse. When children express certain parts of themselves, 
they may receive negative environmental cues. For example, a parent reprimanding a child
for an outburst of emotion (‘you are too sensitive’), or an educator shaming
a child for a behaviour (‘that form of self-expression is too much’). 
The personal shadow represents a collection of repressed aspects of our
identity (such as, personal attributes, impulses or qualities that were discouraged).
In Jungian theory, shadow work requires one to delve deeply into exploring
the unconscious aspects of our identity that we have repressed to correctly
assimilate the shadow into conscious self-awareness.

The following vignette describes exploring and integrating one's shadow.
As a child, I knew I was different from the other children. I felt
disorganised when I would forget to bring things to class. I had a wealth
of ideas; however, I was not able to sort them into a structured essay in
a timely manner. That would lead to panic to hand something in after
the due date. I was always behind in my work at school, and when the
teacher reminded me that the workload would increase in later years,
I felt fear and despair. I felt unreliable as I was always late to things. I
had no concept of time. When it was approaching time to leave the
house, I thought I could stop and do 10 things on the way and somehow
make it on time. I was told I was untidy and often got into trouble
because my room looked messy. The shadow dynamic manifested in
low self-esteem and feelings of shame. As I grew older, I attempted to repress my natural way
of being and I tried to adapt to the needs of others, at the expense of myself. 
My social persona was constantly changing to be everything
for everyone. I loved helping others and overcommitted to things. 
I learnt to hide my struggles and make it appear that
I was good, and then I would collapse at the end of each day with exhaustion. 
Prior to receiving an ADHD diagnosis, I had thought that there was something wrong with me and
that other people were managing things better than me. At the heart of shadow work is 
developing self-awareness, self-acceptance, and self-compassion.
An ADHD diagnosis has helped me to understand, accept and embrace
a healthy sense of self. I have been gifted with a problem-solving mind,
and it brings me great joy to do so. I have an interest-based nervous
system and tend to flourish in environments that value diverse thinking
skills. Hyperempathy has led me to engage with the world on a deep
level. I am embracing my strengths. I am passionate, witty, and fun. 
My interests are varied. With this newfound awareness, I am remembering to 
check in with what feels authentic to me and self-invest mindfully.
The transformative power of getting to know oneself has led to greater freedom of 
agency and self-expression in my life. I am engaging with the world in a way that feels
authentic and meaningful to me.

The Process of Self-Realisation
Problems can arise when a person overly identifies with their social
persona and cannot access the depth of their authentic self (that is, what feels
true to them as an individual). A pathway towards wholeness is
assimilating the shadow into who we are. For example, if a parent valued
conformity and discouraged any form of self-expression, the process of
individuation would be to embrace expression as an important aspect of
oneself. Jung saw the process of self-realisation as the discovery of finding
oneself, to move towards psychological wholeness. Through the
individuation process, we increase our consciousness to achieve harmony
and growth.
The following vignette depicts recognising, acknowledging, and
integrating different aspects of oneself.
As a child, I was rewarded for my academic achievements in science. It
was irrelevant where my interests lay, as others dictated my path. I was
naturally inclined to be creative however these pursuits were
discouraged. As a child, I had no healthy space to express anger. I was
encouraged to conform without question. I felt like I had to silence
myself from speaking my truth. There was a strong emphasis on being
a member of society who was known to make others happy. My father
modelled a selfless persona. I grew to believe that affection from my
parents was associated with achieving or pleasing others. I would feel
that I would have to give in to what other people want, or they would not
accept me. The assumptions about how the world works and the best
way to behave influenced my thoughts and actions, even though I was
not always aware of this. For example, when a friend cancelled a catch-
up, I would immediately assume that was my fault and they did not like me. My lack of early
experience in life with testing out my boundaries, processing my
emotions, exploring my interests, and articulating my needs didn’t
allow me an opportunity to learn. As an adult, I had no idea who I was
or what I wanted in life. It was not until I was able to free myself from
the cloak of conditioning that I could explore what lay within. I learnt
how to give myself permission to feel my emotions. I learnt how to
prioritise my health and wellbeing, and I proactively put supports in
place that were suited to my individual needs. I have learnt my limits
and am much better at accepting them. I have intentionally practised
self-expression and am communicating what I want to actualise in life.

Exploring our inner world creates more genuine connections with
ourselves and others. Individuation encompasses the integration of the
mind (to embrace oneself in its entirety, rather than being at odds with
oneself), the pursuit of self-discovery (a deeper sense of meaning and self-
discovery), and the interconnectedness of human existence (in the form of, more
fulfilling relationships).

Jung stated:
‘Individuation means becoming an ‘in-dividual’, and in so far as
‘individuality’ embraces our innermost, last, and incomparable
uniqueness, it also implies becoming one’s own self. We could
therefore translate individuation as ‘coming to selfhood’ or ‘self-
realisation’.

Getting to know your personal roadblocks is a critical step towards
achieving overall mental health and wellbeing, as depicted in the following
vignette.
I have picked myself up from ruin so many times. I have experienced
a pattern repeating. When I find something I am passionate about, I
give it my absolute all. If I am not offered flexibility to accommodate
as needed, I will eventually become burnt out. I have experienced
mental breakdowns that were debilitating and scary. When I could no
longer function, I became extremely isolated and in fear of pursuing
my passions. With the help of my psychologist, we were able to create
a safe path that allowed me to understand my nervous system and
accommodate my individual needs. I now feel the flow of operating
within my own space and time, which is joyously expressive.

One of the benefits of obtaining an understanding of ADHD (particularly
an understanding of hyper empathy and rejection-sensitive dysphoria) is
that people learn to check in and honour their needs, as described in the
following vignette.
In my 20s, I was adventurous and travelled the world. My hyper-
empathy meant seeing the best in people and giving to my heart’s
content. When I look back at unhealthy relationships in which toxic
people sought to exert control over me, I feel compassion for my inner
child and want to protect her beauty and adventurous spirit.

The following vignette describes a journey towards self-investment.
In the past I had a perfectionistic pursuit of giving my absolute all at work. 
In the workplace setting I was known to be good at putting out spotfires and 
problem-solving. People come to me for answers. As an employee, I was not
credited for the work of helping others, as the workplace only
measured pre-determined output. When I got home from work, I had
nothing left for myself. I became reclusive. That led to ADHD burnout. 
With a newfound understanding of ADHD, I have learnt to ruthlessly
defend my time. I am accepting accommodations and energy accounting 
(for instance I am time blocking to avoid over scheduling and selectively 
engaging in activities that involve self-investment).

My own personal journey with shadow work has been transformative. In
childhood, I often felt that I was too much. I irritated adults when 
I would question why things occurred. My inner child wished for a healthy 
adult to help me understand social norms. I attempted to repress my emotions, curiosity,
and self-expression. It felt like I was limiting myself to a small box that
dulled me down. I had been taught to push through and ignore what my
body was telling me. This type of repression took its toll. I could not
regulate, relate, or reason in a way that I needed to. The social fatigue of
my persona weighed heavily on me. I was operating in survival mode,
which exacerbated my anxiety, precipitated ritualistic behaviours and eventuated
in unhealthy ways of coping. Despite achieving academically, my mental health
concerns and inability to function resulted in my need to drop out of
school after year ten.
When I realised that I was autistic, it felt like someone had handed me
the key to acceptance and understanding. A pathway towards wholeness
involved unmasking from the social persona and embracing the shadow
self, to no longer feel hidden and disconnected. I understood what safety
(feeling regulated) and connection (feeling related) looked like for me
personally. I was able to notice signs of dysregulation in my body and
I learnt coping strategies. I learnt to adopt a lifestyle that actively 
supports the regulation of my nervous system.
Autism was so much more than a diagnosis to me. Self-realisation felt
liberating. Integrating the parts of myself that were discouraged allowed
me to focus my efforts on thriving as my autistic self.
Exploring my shadow led to greater authenticity, internal strength
and conservation of my energy. I no longer diminish myself. Self-expression feels 
freeing. I have embraced my sensitivity, passions and deep thinking. 
I am naturally a curious person who questions things. I am a great advocate for 
being respectful of people’s needs, including my own. I am ambitious and passionate. 
When I am in tune with my mind, it feels like I am moving through a boulevard of
green lights. Although some people will try to demand that you fit into
their box, that says more about their limits than mine. I feel a sense of
autistic pride.