Neuroception and the Autonomic Hierarchy
Polyvagal theory, introduced in 1994 by psychologist Stephen
Porges, highlights the role of the autonomic nervous system in
regulating our health and behaviour. The theory uses the
term neuroception, which refers to how our neural circuits detect and
evaluate cues of safety, danger or threat. Unlike perception, this system
occurs outside of conscious thought. Our lived experience of engaging
with the world is impacted by external environmental cues, internal
physical sensations, and relational experiences (that is, an impression of
connection, safety, and trust between individuals). Neuroception is our
body’s unconscious surveillance system that shifts us into one of three
autonomic states needed to respond to a situation: rest-and-digest (social
and safe), fight-or-flight (mobilisation) or shutdown/collapse
(immobilisation).

Polyvagal theory describes a physiological and psychological understanding of our
autonomic nervous system and depicts a pathway for shifting in and out
of the different states. 

Deb Dana, a clinical social worker who specialises in applying
polyvagal theory to complex trauma, advises that it is useful to think of
the hierarchical nature of the three autonomic nervous system responses
as a ladder. If we envisage being at the top of the ladder (in a state of ventral vagal
regulation), the ventral vagal system is part of your social engagement
system and leads to feelings of safety and connection. The ventral vagal state of safety and 
homeostasis (the rest and digest response) is characterised by feeling grounded, mindful, 
curious and collaborative. When we are grounded in our ventral vagal pathway, we are at our greatest
capacity for connection. Social connectedness plays a critical role in
promoting physical and emotional health; thus, we ultimately want to return
to this regulated state of wellbeing and connection. 
We may move down the ladder into a state of sympathetic mobilisation when the body
experiences stress (for instance, our level of arousal increases), or we are 
physically active or if there is a perceived threat in the environment. 
In this state (sympathetic mobilisation), the sympathetic nervous system is activated.
The sympathetic nervous system is responsible for the "fight or fligt" response,
which prepares the body for action in stressful situations. Physical
signs of a fight or flight response include rapid heart rate and breathing
and muscles becoming tense and primed for action. If the sympathetic system is too
aroused, dorsal vagal activation triggers your body to move into a state of
shutdown. In this state, the parasympathetic system is activated. 
The autonomic state of a Dorsal Vagal Collapse (the most primitive
pathway of response) helps to protect against life threat by immobilising
and shutting down. During immobilisation, our metabolism slows down,
our heart rate and breathing slow, and blood pressure drops, which
presents as fatigue and mental fog. Deb Dana explains that when you experience 
an autonomic state of a dorsal vagal collapse, it is helpful to 
remember that you are still on the ladder. If you are immobilised in a state of shutdown 
(the bottom of the ladder), you must first progress through mobilisation (the middle of the
ladder) to return to the safe and social state (the top of the ladder). 

Deb Dana's research findings highlight that thoughts follow on from the 
autonomic states with a story of connection, protection and disconnection.
The following vignette depicts an experience of how an ADHDers
thinking may present in each autonomic state.

A story of connection: 
When I am in a ventral vagal state of regulation, I have
a baseline of energy to enjoy doing
the activities that I love. I rediscover my love of
learning and creativity. I have an urge
for social engagement. I feel present in
the moment. I feel hopeful.


A Story of Protection. When I am experiencing a heightened state of stress
(mobilisation), I feel a sense of urgency,
like time is running out. I worry about
what needs to be done and I feel distressed by my to-do lists. 
I experience survival mode thinking and an overwhelming sense of responsibility. 
I am hyper-focused on productivity, often at
the expense of my own needs.

A Story of Disconnection. When I
experience an autonomic state of a
dorsal vagal collapse, I compare myself
to others. I feel like I have been left
behind and I don’t measure up. I feel like
the world is an overwhelming place. I
psychologically withdraw and detach. I
can’t see my way out. I experience
hopelessness and existential thinking
(I question what is the meaning of life, who
am I connected to, what is my
purpose). I feel fatigued numb, and
experience brain fog. When I am in this state I need to sleep
more than usual.

Polyvagal theory empowers us with a mindful awareness of the
autonomic nervous system states and pathways of response. The
following vignette is an experience of navigating the autonomic hierarchy
(as an example of going up the ladder).
When I first started counselling, I learnt that I was experiencing an
autonomic state of a dorsal vagal collapse. At that point in time, I was
failing university, sleeping to cope with my distress, and I was not able
to reach out to my course coordinator to ask for help, no matter how
hard I tried. My thoughts (it is hopeless, I don’t measure up) were not
accurate reflections of how I genuinely feel about myself; rather, they
were reflective of my underlying autonomic state of a dorsal vagal
collapse. I was at the bottom of the ladder.
I wanted to understand why my body was experiencing a state of
shutdown. I realised that the chronic levels of anxiety and stress I had
been experiencing throughout the university semester had eventuated
in ADHD burnout and a dorsal vagal collapse. My psychologist
educated me that when our bodies experience chronic stress, they can
develop various conditions. My burnout stemmed from an
overwhelmed nervous system, and the body has a failsafe survival
mechanism of a dorsal vagal shutdown. This explained why my body
felt immobilised, dissociated, tired, and my brain felt foggy. This
understanding also helped me view my body as functional (that is, the
dorsal vagal shutdown was a protective response to help conserve
energy) and gave me a clear pathway of what to do next.
My psychologist explained that I can move up the ladder (that is, activate
out of shutdown and shift towards a mobilised state) by engaging in
activities that are regulatory, rhythmic, and involve movement. I
engaged in yoga, dancing, meditation, breathing exercises, and
spending time in nature. I enjoyed the calming presence of being with
my dog and reached out to loved ones. Over time, I reached an
embodied state of safety and connection (I was at the top of the ladder).