Tuning Into Neuro-Biological Needs
Psychiatrist Bruce Perry’s model of sequential engagement and
processing in brain states highlights the need to regulate and relate
before reaching the reasoning part of our brain. Frustration, anger,
and fear can shut down parts of the cortex, adversely impacting the ability
to reflect, remember, articulate, and become self-assured.
Dr Perry provides an example of test anxiety, in which the content is
stored; however, in a dysregulated state retrieval of
that information is not possible.
Dr Perry advises that in order to re-engage the thinking brain when a
person is stressed and operating in survival mode, we need to regulate
and calm the stress response. Patterned, repetitive, rhythmic rewarding
activity (such as, walking, dancing, listening to music, repetitive meditative
breathing, drumming, yoga and so on) can restore regulatory balance. Cues of safety 
(that is, a neuroception of relational safety) are also
imperative to allow a person to move from a highly aroused anxious state
to a calmer state.
The following vignette depicts the application of regulating and
relating before attempting to reason.
Georgia recently attended a professional development event that
consisted of a large number of people breaking into groups to role-
play scenarios. As the level of noise in the room increased, she found
it impossible to concentrate. When it was Georgia’s turn to role play,
she was evidently anxious and could not remember the content or
articulate herself. Her peers became frustrated at her inability to
participate. Georgia felt dysregulated and disconnected from everyone
in the room. Georgia excused herself to go to the bathroom to allow
herself to calm her stress response. When she returned to the room,
she explained that she was distracted by the sound and needed to move
to a quieter room to complete the activity. After moving rooms, it was
easier to concentrate due to the reduced level of stimulation. Upon
reaching a state of calm and connection, Georgia was able to recall the
content and participate in actively role-playing what she had learnt
that day.
It is essential to create space to care for our body and ensure it is well-
resourced. When we are under-resourced, we are more likely to go into
an autopilot mode termed a survival state. Symptoms of a survival state
are related to increased sympathetic nervous system activity, which
triggers our body’s response to stress and danger. According to Perry,
there are four survival states — fawn, fight, flee and freeze that may lead
us to react to situations in ways that end up hurting us.
Fawn. A vigilant anticipation to stay ahead of a potential threat. The
goal of a fawn response is to please and appease to avoid conflict
and rejection. This may present as being overly apologetic, being
unable to say no, assuming responsibility for another person’s
emotional reactions and mood (for example, if you are okay, then I am
okay), and placating others at the expense of the self. This may also
present as over-achieving.
Fight. A fight response can manifest in a negative way through
verbal attacks, criticism, and defensive responses. When used in
a healthy way, you can set boundaries and advocate for the self
and others.
Flight. The goal of a flight response is escaping pain to protect the
self. Your response in flight mode may look like distraction and
avoidance (for example, spending more time on your phone playing
games or self-medicating).
Freeze. A freeze response may present as not communicating or
responding in the hope that the threat will pass. This response may
lead to feeling stuck in the form of not making any move and
disconnection from others.
The following vignette describes operating in survival mode as a nervous
system response.
When I fawn, I will go to great lengths to avoid disappointment. I am
drawn to putting out spot fires and responding to other’s needs. Over
time, I began feeling ashamed at the snowballing impact of not looking
after myself. When my body is under-resourced, my thoughts become
intrusive thoughts (in that, I imagine things going terribly wrong), and I
experience symptoms of panic. My inability to fall asleep and pain
flares wear me down.
I am learning to redirect out of survival mode by self-investing. This
looks like showing up for myself. When my body is well-resourced, I
feel more hopeful and have a baseline of energy to enjoy my life.
The neuroscience of brain states is particularly important in clinical
practice as clients are often offered cognitive behavioural therapy (that is,
questioning the rationality of a thought) as a first-line treatment
approach, which may not be an appropriate intervention when a person
is dysregulated and disconnected. Traditional talk-based methods
of therapy that are cognitively oriented (in that they, focus on logic and
reasoning) are viewed as a top-down approach to treatment. Perry states,
‘Despite the well-documented effects of fear and anxiety on the ability to
reason, often programs tend to ignore the need to engage the safety
system of the brain and focus instead on recruiting the cognitive capacities
of the mind’. Polyvagal theory has enabled us to
become more conscious of combining top-down approaches (that
promote new ways of thinking, such as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy)
with bottom-up methods. A bottom-up approach, also known as somatic
or sensory-based therapy, focuses on the body’s physical sensations. A
bottom-up approach aims to regulate the autonomic nervous system and
promote safety by targeting the body’s response to stress.
For example, when I am overtired or stressed, my mind likes to come
up with intrusive thoughts about what could go wrong (for instance, unlikely
feared outcomes). In these circumstances, I already know that my
thoughts are irrational; thus trying to challenge my thinking does not tend
to ease my mind. What I do find helpful in these moments is to tune into
what my body needs to feel a sense of calm. When I am feeling
hyperactive, it may be that I need movement to help me down-regulate.
When overstimulated, I often need sensory rest or an accommodation
such as my noise-cancelling headphones. To switch off, I time-block days
for engaging in creative pursuits. I frequently enjoy seeing live gigs.
Music is something that I find to be therapeutic.
The following prompts help to consider how a person’s thoughts may
be impacted by their environment (that is sensory input) and how emotions may
appear within the body (that is somatic input):
•
Consider the impact of environmental triggers (for instance, am I under or
over-stimulated, or stressed) and if an accommodation is
needed.
•
Consider relational triggers (in that, people can either co-regulate or
reinforce habitual survival patterns).
•
Consider if you have gone into autopilot (for example, subconscious ingrained habits
or survival mode states)?
•
Consider neurobiological daily needs. Prioritising health and wellbeing, in
the form of self-care is particularly important. A balanced diet,
time to pursue leisure activities, including movement in your
daily routine, and mindfulness can assist with this.
•
Consider Energy accounting as a method of
monitoring how biopsychosocial stressors impact our baseline
(for example, consider the cumulative impact of quality of sleep, level of
fatigue, factoring in the effect of hormonal cycles, and so on).
The following vignette demonstrates an application of a bottom-up
approach to alleviating symptoms of social anxiety.
John felt dysregulated and disconnected from people at a work event,
and he found engaging in small talk exhausting. John spiralled into a
plethora of socially anxious thoughts, such as ‘Am I doing or saying
the right thing?’ or ‘Am I being interesting or funny enough?’ When
John applied a top-down approach (such as, challenging the rationality of
his thoughts with Cognitive Behavioural Therapeutic techniques), it
was ineffective in that he became increasingly self-conscious and
inhibited in his social interactions. He began to experience symptoms
of a tension headache. John induced a self-compassionate mindset by
recognising that it was the end of a busy working week, and his social
anxiety was likely secondary to his underlying state of fatigue (in that, his
tank was empty). John found it helpful to defuse his thoughts and
alternatively apply a body-up approach by engaging in emotional rest
by reducing the need to be ‘socially on’. Whilst John is usually the life
of the party, he prioritised his health and wellbeing by allowing himself
to leave the event early.
Consider how a healthy lifestyle can increase Dopamine, Serotonin, Oxytocin and
Endorphins.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that is an essential part of your brain’s
reward system. It is associated with pleasurable sensations, learning and
memory. Natural ways to increase dopamine include regular exercise,
starting the day with eating healthy food high in protein rather than
consuming sugar and carbs, and engaging in enjoyable activities.
Listening to music has been shown to increase brain activity in areas rich
in dopamine receptors. Serotonin, like dopamine, is a
neurotransmitter that helps regulate sleep, digestion, and mood. It also
regulates memory and learning (enabling us to focus better to retain
information). Studies have shown that spending time outdoors can
increase the production of serotonin. Chronic levels of
stress can negatively impact your brain’s production of serotonin.
Techniques to manage stress may include deep breathing, progressive
muscle relaxation, meditation, and journaling. Oxytocin can have a
positive impact on social engagement (with relation to relaxation, trust, intimacy, and
empathy). When we spend quality time or collaborate with people, we
feel good. Bonding over an experience such as cooking can help to
promote oxytocin levels. Physical affection or massage can also boost
oxytocin production. Co-regulating with an
animal (such as, patting your dog) is another excellent way to increase
oxytocin levels. Endorphins regulate emotional
responses (enabling us to cope more effectively with stress and
anxiety) and act as your body’s natural pain reliever (specifically, endorphins
interact with pain receptors in your brain, essentially reducing your
perception of pain). Research has shown a link
between physical activity and endorphin release. Laughter can also trigger
endorphin release.
Creating a healthy culture at work for neurodivergent people can be
achieved by attending to certain aspects of the working day. A neuro-
affirming approach that naturally values diverse thinking skills and
provides sufficient opportunities for progression is a welcoming
environment that allows a neurodivergent employee to stand with pride
and to feel safe to ask for the accommodations that they need.
Collaboration among workers is likely to improve communication,
empathy, and problem-solving. Through listening to and learning from
one another, we can establish trust and meaningful connections.
Ultimately though, supporting individuals to tailor their own support
needs encourages self-care, as depicted in the following vignette:
With a newfound sense of embodied self-awareness, I am much more
conscious of things that make me uncomfortable and what I can do to
make life a little bit easier. For example, I surround myself with people
who correct me towards healthy behaviours (specifically, permission to self-
care) rather than self-sabotaging by ignoring my own needs for the
sake of fitting in. I have found a tribe of people who appreciate me.
Equally, my friends feel comfortable to tell me what they need. For
example, a friend of mine messaged me to see if I would like to go out
for dinner with her; however, she prefaced it with an ADHD hashtag
that she may need to cancel at the last minute if she wasn’t feeling up
to going out later that day. Accordingly, we planned to meet at my
workplace, and that way, if she cancelled at the last minute, it was no
problem.
An understanding and acceptance of my difficulties has been
transformative. I sometimes use humour as a way of coping with the
quirky things I do to function in life. For example, I compassionately
acknowledge in a witty way my need to set multiple alarms, tie things
down such as my keys and wallet to ensure I can’t lose them and have
flashing lights to remember to drink water. I accept that there are days
when I will completely go off track or struggle. My goal is to check in
with what I need, which helps me shift in and out of states more easily
and ultimately feel more comfortable.