Understanding ADHD
Burnout Within the Workplace
S
tress is a normal part of life. No matter how much we wish or strive
for a stress-free day at work, some days will be difficult. That’s
something we mainly deal with; however, when stress becomes
prolonged or greater than our ability to cope, it can cause burnout.
Burnout is a state of complete mental, physical, and emotional exhaustion
leading to decreased cognitive functioning ability and disturbances in our
bodies via an overstressed autonomic nervous system.
ADHD burnout can occur when an employee feels out of sync with
the work environment. This may result from a lack of accommodations,
sensory overload, and/or suppressing ADHD traits. In addition to a
neurodivergent individual developing new skills to promote their
wellbeing, acceptance and understanding from others are needed to help
overcome burnout.
Finding support for burnout within a workplace can sometimes be
challenging. Unlike in the case of someone who turns up at work with a
broken leg, it isn’t apparent how best to support someone suffering from
burnout. In writing this chapter, I hope that by understanding the impact
of ADHD burnout in the workplace, employers and coworkers can help
the ADHD community by promoting neurological diversity.
Characteristics of ADHD that are of great value to a workplace include
hyper-focus, compassion, curiosity, innovation, calmness in a crisis,
intuition, and creativity. ADHD employees often thrive in situations of
rapid change that reward out-of-the-box thinking. These skills are found
across a wide range of occupations, including doctor, scientist, engineer,
tech expert, comedian, artist, and teacher.
One of the great strengths of being neurodivergent is the skilled ability
of divergent thinking. The two terms convergent thinking (i.e., one defined
solution to a problem) and divergent thinking were coined by
psychologist Joy Paul Guilford in 1956. The exceptional divergent
thinking skills of ADHD entrepreneurs are a process of generating
creative ideas to explore possible solutions and create efficient systems
alongside people management skills. Well-known ADHD entrepreneurs
include Richard Branson, Bill Gates, and Walt Disney.
While employers are often impressed by divergent thinking abilities,
they are equally as perplexed as to why the employee has not completed
convergent tasks on time (i.e., admin duties, responding to emails,
prioritising, etc.). The term ‘twice exceptional’ is used to
describe  gifted  learners with the potential for high achievement
(engaging the gifted mind at an intellectual level) while also
acknowledging disabilities (without accommodation, an employee with
ADHD may spend hours completing a task that can take others five
minutes to complete).
Successful ADHD-tailored supports in a workplace minimise the
negative and leverage the positive. A strength-based approach seeks to
acknowledge the talents, interests, and skills upon which the person can
build a life of success and joy. If a person is genuinely proud of who they
are, it helps them navigate the world better. This way, expectations
become more realistic and do not require the person to meet
unreasonable standards.
ADHD-tailored supports may include (but are not limited to):
•
Provide a quiet workspace that minimises distractions.
•
Allow the use of noise cancellation or white noise.
•
Work from home if there are no effective accommodations in
the office environment/ need for respite.
•
Scheduling uninterrupted work time.
•
Taking brain breaks as required.
•
Minimising marginal functions to allow focus on essential job
duties.
•
Assistance with prioritisation.
•
Assistive technology (timers, apps, calendars, etc.).
•
Turning off distractions — including mobile phones.
•
Asking a supervisor to set deadlines for tasks.
•
Teaming with another person as an accountability partner.
•
Recording meetings.
•
Visual schedules.
•
Avoiding over-scheduling by estimating how long each task or
meeting will take (time blocking).
•
Valuing diverse thinking skills and offering sufficient progression
opportunities for employees.
Promoting Neurological Diversity within the Workplace
Setting up reasonable accommodations for ADHDers in the workplace
does not require lowering performance standards or removing essential
functions of an individual’s job. Instead, it is about positive acceptance
and an understanding that accommodating ADHD can contribute to
everyone’s continued growth and self-awareness. The aim is to find a
balance between allowing an employee to continue to work to overcome
challenges and allowing space for a sense of acceptance and willingness to
accept accommodations where appropriate. Flexible working
arrangements that allow for movement breaks to be taken as needed and
days to work from home may also be helpful.
It is important that ADHD-tailored supports are developed
in collaboration with an employee to meet their individual needs. Be
careful not to make assumptions based on limited knowledge about
ADHD or to micromanage the employee. There is a common saying, ‘If
you have met one neurodivergent person, you have met one
neurodivergent person’. This means that what will work for one person
may not be suitable for another. Neurodivergent presentations vary from
person to person and across gender and age. An adult with ADHD can
present quite differently from a young male child with ADHD. Thus, it is
essential to have a tailored and collaborative approach.
Ultimately, we want to empower neurodivergent individuals to feel
comfortable asking for the accommodations and support they need.
Neuroinclusive is a term that refers to an environment that embraces and
respects differences and supports the needs of neurodivergent people.
Common barriers that neurodivergent employees face in a workplace
include unconscious biases, a lack of understanding about
neurodivergence (i.e., a manager mocking a staff member for using an
accommodation), ingrained archetypes of leadership that deny equitable
learning and development opportunities, and a failure to acknowledge
lived experience as a form of expertise. It is important to ensure
neurodivergent perspectives are included in any training resources.
Inclusive workplaces that celebrate neurological diversity remain open-
minded and curious about how best to support people.