‘Your Brain is Incredible’
The noted US psychiatrist, Dr Edward Hallowell, specialises in
ADHD and delivers a diagnosis to a child in a way that emphasises
strengths and builds a healthy sense of self. Hallowell advises a
twelve-year-old child, ‘I have great news for you. We’ve learned a lot
about you, Jeremy, and guess what? You have an amazing brain. Your
brain is incredible. Hallowell uses the analogy of a Ferrari engine outfitted
with bicycle brakes. Hallowell states, ‘Your brakes are not strong enough
to control the powerful brain you’ve got. So, sometimes, you race past
places where you mean to stop, or you ignore instructions you mean to
hear. But don’t worry. I am a brake specialist. I will help you strengthen
your brakes so you can become the champion you are.’ Hallowell argues
that leveraging a child’s strengths leads to overall success and wellbeing as
the child believes they will excel despite disappointment and defeat.
Furthermore, this approach encourages a growth mindset that promotes
resilience.
A strength-based perspective does not deny that disorders such as
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder carry potentially life-threatening
risks and disabilities. However, it also seeks to acknowledge the talents,
interests, and skills upon which the person can build a life of success and
joy. If a person is genuinely proud of who they are, it helps them to
navigate the world better. In this way, expectations become more realistic
and do not require the person to meet unreasonable standards.
One of the most challenging things I find about navigating the world
with ADHD is when people don’t believe that ADHD exists. I have
enough struggles to manage in my daily life without having to justify
my diagnosis. I have difficulty concentrating, focusing and
remembering things. My symptoms of hyperactivity are not visible to
others as I experience them internally. I experience hyperactivity as a
feeling of emotional overwhelm and racing thoughts. Emotional
instability is experienced as increased intensity of moods that can shift
quickly. I have passionate thoughts and emotions that are more intense
than those of the average person. I have difficulty letting go of
thoughts, and I experience anxiety, periods of low mood and sleep
concerns (e.g., difficulty falling asleep). I experience shame (‘feeling
undeserving’) and rejection when I feel that I have fallen short of my
expectations of myself. I am hypersensitive to sensory experiences. It is
uncomfortable for me to work amongst background noise, such as in
open-plan work environments. I use tools such as headphones to
control or limit sensory input or remove myself when I can. When
there is no option to accommodate my individual needs, and I have
exhausted all my strategies for responding, I experience ADHD
burnout. I should not have to get to a point of crisis before my struggles
are believed.
Tailoring support to my neurobiological needs allows my body to feel
well-resourced, and I can embrace the strengths and beauty of my
mind. I have many strengths, including being passionate, honest,
compassionate, good in a crisis (compartmentalise), intuitive, and
creative. I am generally described as warm-hearted, and I develop
genuine and meaningful friendships. I have a strong sense of fairness
and justice. I am loyal, honest, witty, caring and articulate, with an
active and curious mind. My acute sensitivity to sensory experiences
gives me a remarkable view of the world.
Many celebrated innovators of past and present are known or thought to
have had ADHD. ADHDers tend to thrive in situations of rapid change
and variety, as well as environments that reward creativity and out-of-
the-box thinking. The energy, charm, and euphoria of a problem-solving
mind can create a wide variety of businesses that can positively impact
society. Innovations that may improve our standard of living and can also
create jobs and conditions for a prosperous society. Unfortunately, these
perceived advantages may result in disruptive lifestyle choices, poor
impulse control, increased substance abuse, etc. Increased optimism and
grandiosity can lead people to underestimate/dismiss the potential
negative consequences of their behaviour, rush into an activity or make
decisions without carefully considering the pros and cons, and/or only
focus on information confirming their beliefs whilst ignoring evidence.
Individualised medical treatment is often necessary to achieve an overall
sense of balance and prevent symptoms from exacerbating.
While supporting ADHDers to achieve self-care and balance is
important, it is also important for them to follow their heart and trust
that they will do things okay. A fear of fostering strengths, talents, and
interests can leave people feeling disconnected and unable to value
themselves. Embracing an authentic self is an effective formula for
success. The neurodiverse problem-solving mind is not afraid to make
mistakes or give things a go, and often, creativity is stifled by other people
imposing their limits upon others. Problem-solving minds have a wealth
of new ideas. Building a healthy self-concept can promote an eagerness to
learn and the likelihood of developing a self-compassionate mindset that
acknowledges that support is vital and needed. Neurodivergent clients
have an admirable level of psychological grit, and they have worked
incredibly hard to pursue answers.