Self-Identity in the Form of
Integrating a Healthy Sense of Self
n my own professional work, I have often found that in the initial
stages of counselling I feel immense compassion for the stories that I
am told by ADHDers. Many report a history in which, as
neurodivergent individuals, they have endured countless negative
messages and institutional trauma (e.g., feeling unsafe, threatened, and/or
exposed to chronic levels of distress).
Initially, providing a diagnosis or awareness of ADHD can bring about
a massive sense of relief and eagerness to learn. This is often followed by
an important stage of grieving for the struggles that have been, as
described in the vignette below.
As a child, I felt like a bull at a gate. I was often told to ‘think before you
do things’ and ‘reign it in’. People would comment that I was ‘too
sensitive’ and ‘overthinking’ things. I struggled at school because I often
disengaged due to distraction or boredom. I had a plethora of ideas;
however, I was not able to get my ideas out of my mind and write them
down. I often took longer than the intended time to complete my tasks.
The feedback that I received at school was ‘you need to apply yourself
and be more organised’. I was constantly striving to get it right and was
chronically stressed. Years of achieving below my potential resulted in
low self-esteem. I felt like a burden, with no one to turn to.
As an adolescent I found it difficult to maintain friendships. I was
hypervigilant to social cues and felt excessively self-conscious. I
presented as either being inhibited in social situations or I have no filter
and talk incessantly, with no in-between. My approach to socialising
was either a people pleasing approach or isolating myself, by cutting
contact. Impulsivity and my difficulty with social skills often resulted
in me being more likely to take risks.
As an adult I would hyperfocus on my work, to the point of exhaustion,
which would eventuate in burn out. At the end of each working day, I
would collapse on my couch at night and eat sugar and carbs instead
of making myself dinner. I had no energy left to enjoy my personal life.
Activities that I previously enjoyed, such as cooking and socialising,
began to feel like a chore, as I didn’t have the baseline energy needed
to enjoy them.
My mind is perpetually consumed with distressing to do lists. My mind
repeatedly asks, what are the things I need to do today? What are all the
unfinished projects I have started and not finished? What are all the
things in this lifetime I would like to learn? I constantly feel on the back
foot and time poor. I know I am intelligent; however, I feel like an
imposter, and I don’t feel good enough.
When I look back on each of the phases of my life, I can see the level
of overwhelm I was experiencing. I have experienced clinically
significant periods of anxiety, depression, burnout, and mental
breakdowns. I want to be at the top of my game; however, I am also
mindful of my mental health. I have always felt different.
An important part of the healing process is identifying the vulnerability
of the inner child within and the associated psychological defences we
may have formed due to unmet psychological needs. Schema Therapy,
an approach developed by psychologist Jeffrey Young, provides a
framework for identifying how we hold memories of painful experiences,
distressing emotions, and physical sensations, as depicted in the following
vignette.
As a child, when I became emotional, adults would ask, ‘Why are you
crying?’ I learnt to suppress my feelings and make it appear that all was
good. Anger was an emotion that was discouraged, and my attempts to
say no to things were shut down. When I was overstimulated or under-
resourced, I experienced meltdowns and was punished for having
reacted that way. It was not until I reached a point of crisis in childhood
that my needs were recognised. I grew up thinking that something was
wrong with me and that others were managing life so much better than
me. There was a sense of loneliness in not being able to express the
things that felt important to me. With an understanding of how my
unmet childhood needs were impacting my negative self-beliefs and
coping modes, I could start the process of healing.
The following examples are the application of Schema Therapy in the
form of identified child modes and coping modes (Young, Klosko, &
Weishaar, 2003). Schema modes are the moment-to-moment emotional
states and coping responses that we can experience when we are triggered
by situations.
•
The lonely child mode. ‘As a child I experienced big emotions. I
felt alone in my emotions with no one to turn too’.
•
Rejected child mode. ‘I feared burdening people or being
rejected for feeling so deeply’.
•
The angry child mode. ‘I felt a deep sense of injustice, being mis­
understood, or dismissed throughout my childhood’.
•
The shamed child mode. ‘I feel worthless and incapacitated by
shame’.
•
The detached self-soother. ‘I detach by engaging in activities
that either soothe, stimulate, or distract from my emotional
experience’.
•
The event-post mortem ruminator. ‘I repeatedly review my
behaviour following a social interaction, focusing on evidence that
I did not do well or made a poor impression’.
Inner Childhood Wounds
In Schema Therapy, The origin of inner childhood wounds resides in
childhood experiences of humiliation, rejection, injustices, hostility
and/or unresponsiveness. We can internalise these messages as self-
criticism (‘I am not good enough’), shame (‘what is wrong with me’), and
an impending sense of threat (‘I don’t feel a visceral sense of safety in my
body’), as depicted in the following vignette.
Lauren has spent her childhood being told that she overthinks things
and that her feelings are not valid. She was repetitively told that she is
sensitive, loud, messy, chaotic and impulsive. Lauren had internalised
these messages as being too much. The internalised criticism had
disrupted Lauren’s connection to her intuition, and she no longer
trusted how she thought or felt. This had eventuated in a perpetual
state of people pleasing at the expense of herself, low self-esteem and
unhealthy coping modes (i.e., substance abuse, avoidance, self-harm,
and negative self-talk).
Lauren’s newfound awareness of ADHD and warning signs of distress
has helped her to integrate a healthy sense of self.
I am proud of how I have navigated the mental health care system and
persisted in finding answers. With a newfound awareness of my
ADHD mind, I am offering myself a safe space to feel heard and held.
I am learning to find the balance between connecting with others
whilst also checking in with what feels authentic to me. This has
allowed me to feel a more genuine connection with myself and others.
I am learning to put boundaries in place. I have connections in which
I feel nurtured and prioritised. I see a vast improvement in knowing
what my limits are, and I no longer feel guilty about meeting my
needs. I feel self-compassionate when I am triggered and allow myself
accommodations. I feel more at peace and curious about my place in
the world. I am rediscovering my creativity. I am finding flow in
working within my own space and time. I feel more in tune with my
mind.
It is important to highlight that conscious thought (i.e., cognitions —
neocortex) and taking action (i.e., experiences produce emotions — the
limbic system is involved in the formation of memories related to
emotions, motivation and learning) do not always produce change. For
example, when faced with stressful situations, whether triggered by
external factors (e.g., a perceived deadline) or internal factors (e.g., a fear
of failure triggering shamed-based memories), our body responds (e.g., a
fight or flight response). No matter how much willpower you have
applied, subconscious programming can inhibit change (e.g., a
subconscious urge can lead you to avoid a situation). The subconscious
mind contains stored information from past experiences, especially
experiences from our early childhood, shaping the way we think and act.
Change can require you to memorise a feeling and move what you have
learnt (i.e., healthier habits) from the conscious mind to the subconscious,
as we will continue to explore in the coming chapters.