Breaking Habitual Avoidance
In clinical practice, it is common for ADHD clients to present initially
with a strong feeling of being out of control. They feel at the mercy of
their thoughts and emotions. When this becomes overwhelming, they
may rely on unhealthy coping behaviours such as avoidance, blocking
emotions and masking distress, which can lead to burnout, disconnection
and isolation.
Therapy needs to work toward helping the client drop their mask and
move toward embracing their authentic self by establishing a healthy self-
concept to foster genuine connections with themselves and others.
Dealing With Avoidance Behaviour
Struggling with personal pain is like trying to get out of a Chinese finger
trap. In the first session of treatment, I educate clients that it is our stories
about distress and attempts to escape from it that can amplify pain and
leave us feeling stuck. The Chinese finger trap (a woven bamboo tube) is
a tool I use to demonstrate that when you try to escape being in the finger
trap by pulling away, it constricts, trapping your fingers. Pushing your
fingers into the Chinese finger trap, rather than pulling away from the
discomfort of feeling trapped, creates space, and you can set your fingers
free. Clients can visualise that when we lean into discomfort and make
room for it in an open and curious manner (as opposed to a sole focus on
trying to escape), we make room for healthier ways of relating to distress.
When you move in a direction you care about (e.g. initiating a new
relationship or starting a new course of study), new fears and emotions
arise. Cognitive fusion is when we get entangled with our thoughts and
feel pushed around by them. If you are focused on the view of the past, it
will not allow you to see how best to move forward. For example, a past
failure may lead you to avoid any further study due to an anticipated fear
of failure. Predictions can lead to obsessive thinking about feared
outcomes and reduce motivation to move forward. For example, a fear
of being abandoned by a partner may lead to avoiding ever being open to
dating again. Experiential avoidance is when life becomes about avoiding
internal experiences (thoughts, memories, feelings, etc) even when doing
so creates harm in the long run. The problem with avoiding our negative
emotions is that you will also avoid your positive emotions. Moving
towards our values is when we decide that something we care about is
more important than the discomfort, and we continue to invest mindfully
in what we choose to pursue.
The following vignette is an example of a growth mindset replacing
avoidance behaviour:
Having been diagnosed with ADHD as an adult, I have many
memories of dropping out of courses, either due to something
interrupting my flow (e.g., an admin obstacle that did not allow me to
request an extension to complete my assignment), feeling paralysed by
inaction (e.g., not being able to structure my ideas into an essay in a
timely manner), a lack of interest in the subject matter, and/or a teacher
that was uninspiring. This led to a narrative that I am incapable of
studying. With the help of psychological treatment and connecting
with the ADHD community online, I have a newfound awareness of
how that pattern is repeated. I have developed strategies that support
me, and I have reached out to student support services. I have chosen
a field of study that is more aligned with my interests and will
ultimately allow me to lead a neurodivergent-friendly lifestyle (e.g.,
allow me to operate in a way that feels meaningful and offers flexibility
to meet my needs). I have entered a profession that is creative, varied,
and plays to my strengths.
The Adverse Impact of ADHD Masking
Blocking your emotions and masking (suppressing your natural way of
existing and camouflaging) may lead to burnout, disconnection, and
isolation. Whilst it is important to teach people about refraining or
holding back to help with impulse control, repression of thoughts has a
different energy in which you are afraid to express your emotions or feel
the need to suppress your natural way of existing. Refraining is a healthy
response rather than a reaction; it is a choice rather than a requirement.
It is important that clients feel safe enough to reach out for help before
they reach breaking point. Many clients block their emotions and mask
(camouflage) due to societal discrimination and a lack of
accommodations designed to meet the neurocognitive needs of
neurodivergent minds. The adverse impact of masking can result in
physical symptoms (e.g. Migraines or flares of chronic conditions),
exhaustion (being incapable of leaving the house or self-care), escape
ideation (suicidal thoughts, self-harm), and/or stress-induced psychosis.
Meltdowns eventuate when the person has exhausted their response
strategies, including seeking help. Social fatigue and masking can lead to
an inability to function (i.e., a shutdown) and ADHD Burnout.
The following vignette highlights that although you can teach a person
to repress their emotions and not react, this ultimately will end up hurting
a neurodivergent person.
Prior to being diagnosed as Autistic and ADHD, Hillary had
experienced numerous mental breakdowns and admissions to
psychiatric wards. Hillary benefitted from connecting with the ADHD
and Autistic community, seeking neuro-affirming treatment, and
accommodating in a way that suited her individual neuro-biological
needs (e.g., working from home and setting up a sensory-friendly
home). When long-term family friends visited Hillary in her home,
they sarcastically commented that her identity as a neurodivergent
person was a fad. They recalled having babysat Hillary as a child and
commented that she had coped fine with the bright lights in their
home. Hillary was devastated to hear such dismissive comments.
Hillary advised her guests that it was true that she could survive a day
sitting in a brightly lit space. However, Hillary explained that what they
were failing to understand is that it was the cumulative impact of a lack
of accommodations in her life that resulted in Hillary experiencing
Autistic and ADHD burnout and ultimately mental breakdowns.
Hillary advocated for her right to body autonomy and a recognition of
the difference in how her autonomic nervous system experiences the
world. Hillary received an apology from her family friends, who
recognised that their comments were uneducated opinions, and lacked
compassion. The remarkable improvement in Hillary’s mental health
and wellbeing was evident and attributable to her newfound
acceptance and understanding of how to tailor support to her needs.
It is important to note that the vignette above also illustrates the benefits
of connecting with your Tribe. Nothing is more therapeutic than being in
the presence of the ADHD community. It can feel understandably
overwhelming when life becomes about therapies, routines, and research.
The ADHD community can promote acceptance in ways other people
may not understand and celebrate personal gains like no other.
Embracing Authenticity
I do not believe authenticity to be a destination that one reaches. Rather,
I would describe authenticity as an ability to check in with yourself at any
given moment in time to align with what feels true to you. I often use the
acronym AIM, ‘Authentically investing mindfully,’ as a healthy path
towards one’s valued direction in life. I start with the question, ‘Why am
I investing in the present moment’? The question of ‘why’ keeps me
focused, motivated, and inspired to push forward through obstacles. It
also allows me to look beyond the surface (e.g., this assignment topic does
not feel meaningful to me) and connects me to the greater journey (e.g.,
completing it will allow me to reach the goal of my chosen profession).
The ‘why’ can propel me from apathy towards possibility.
Embodied self-awareness helps us to pay attention to our whole body-
mind subjective experience in the moment. An example from my own
professional life illustrates this concept. I noticed my speech seemed
pressured, and I was talking fast to a colleague. My first thought was that
I was being authentic to my natural way of being, in which I am free to
speak at the rate of my fast mind. Yet, when I intentionally checked in
with my body, I noticed that I was also feeling quite hyperactive. I took a
movement break to help reduce the stress. Upon further self-examination,
I realised I had been experiencing reduced interoception awareness as
stress had slowly been building. My reduced internal awareness of my
emotions meant I did not recognise the need to implement regulation
strategies until the distress had reached a higher intensity.
It is helpful to actively build interoceptive awareness and create
accommodations that pre-emptively reduce emotional build-up (i.e.,
implementing opportunities to engage in regulatory activities) and
accommodate sensory needs.
Energy Accounting
Originally developed by Maja Toudal, an autistic psychologist, the energy
accounting method serves as a technique for managing energy resources.
This approach is likened to balancing a chequebook, which involves
creating two lists in which activities are assigned an energy cost. A list of
things that sap energy (withdrawals) and a list of things that replenish
energy (deposits). A numerical value is then assigned to each withdrawal
and deposit to give it a weighting (100 = takes a lot of energy). The stated
idea is that when withdrawals are made, deposits need to be made to
prevent the account running into overdraft. For example, shopping is
often enjoyable for typical people; however it can be draining and stressful
for ADHDers. Maja likens it to being like a laptop running on batteries.
When just two programs are running, the battery remains charged longer,
but it dies quickly when the laptop runs ten programs at once.
An example of the types of tasks that may lead to a withdrawal may
include (but are not limited to) prolonged stress, not enough downtime,
interpersonal difficulties in relationships, sleep deprivation, chronic pain,
poor nutrition, illness, sensory or emotional overload, being under-
stimulated (e.g., repetitive work that does not allow one to feel a sense of
purpose or meaning), life admin tasks that leads to logistical fatigue,
ADHD masking, a lack of structure or routine, and/or overcommitting to
things etc.
Due to neurological differences (i.e., living in a world that sometimes
feels out of sync with your neurobiological needs), there can be a higher
cost associated with balancing the many demands and competing needs
that come with adult life. The aim is to reduce the accumulative load and
create a sense of balance (i.e., ensuring that we are not falling into
unhealthy traps of prioritising one thing at the expense of another, such
as overachieving at work at the cost of the self).
The following vignette describes how energy accounting can help you
find balance.
I have experienced crashes at various points in my life that involve
features of burnout and depression. For example, I realised the
accumulative impact of being stuck in an unhealthy pattern of working
long hours. When I got home, I would fall into a heap on my couch,
skin picking at my hands and mindlessly scrolling on my phone. I was
too fatigued to make myself dinner, so I would end up eating junk food
and falling asleep on the couch. I am breaking the cycle of pushing
through discomfort, as it eventuates in my body becoming under-
resourced. I no longer expect to always be functioning at my best at
work. The impact of stress loading accumulates, which means that even
reducing the load in small ways can add up to more mental space and
conserve energy. I am energy accounting by taking inventory of what
depletes and replenishes me. Sometimes this might mean choosing to
spend energy in an area that will drain me (e.g. attending a creative
arts event in a crowded space) because I value it or I am craving that
type of stimulation. Whereas other times I may choose to intentionally
prioritise my nervous system health. I am continuing to add to a ‘menu’
of things that are restorative. These include alone time (i.e., not
overcommitting to social engagements and blocking out uninterrupted
time at my workplace), being in low-sensory spaces, spending time
with my friends, and following specific processes and routines that
work for me. Different mental activities, such as reading a book (rather
than scrolling on my phone) and engaging in my special interest of
sewing, are experiential deposits that allow me to shift gears towards a
mode of being versus doing.