ADHD and
The Threat-and-Soothing
Cycle of Procrastination
O
ne of the great strengths associated with an ADHD mind is the
skilled ability of divergent thinking. Divergent thinking is
described as an ability to think outside the box and entails the
free flow of generating spontaneous ideas and creative solutions to solve
problems. Commonly reported character strengths reported by
ADHDers are:
•
Creativity: Thinking of novel and productive ways to
conceptualise and do things.
•
Curiosity: Taking an interest in ongoing experience for its own
sake, finding subjects and topics of fascinating, exploring and
discovering.
•
Love of Learning: Mastering new skills, topics and bodies of
knowledge, whether on one’s own or formally, with a tendency to
add systematically to what one knows. (Source: VIA Institute
character strengths survey).
ADHDers tend to thrive in situations of variety and rapid change due to
being highly skilled learners with exceptional problem-solving abilities.
Conversely, there are certain triggers of perceived threat that can lead to
ADHD paralysis and require a need to soothe before actioning a task.
Commonly reported triggers of threat that can lead to ADHD paralysis
(a state of physical, mental, and emotional overwhelm) can include:
•
Initial enquiries (i.e., contacting unfamiliar people to request
further information).
•
Task initiation of administrative tasks (i.e., completing tax
returns, invoicing, etc.).
•
Responding to messages (i.e., particularly those that require
future planning/commitments).
•
Imposter syndrome (i.e., feeling like a fraud).
•
Choice paralysis (i.e., ambiguity about what the task may
involve).
•
Rejection-sensitive dysphoria (i.e., the self-judgement of letting
someone down).
ADHD paralyses is described in the following vignette:
Prior to making an enquiry, my mind anticipates every scenario and
response that may play out. My anxiety is rooted in the ambiguity of
unknowns. It’s almost as if I need to know the answer before I ask a
question. My rational mind tells me that once I start conversing, the
interaction will go well (i.e., I will respond to new information as
needed). The memory of past positive interactions does not help with
initiating the task. The level of being overwhelmed and paralysed
incapacitates my ability to initiate the task.
It is important to be self-compassionate about the level of distress
associated with ADHD paralyses.
Decision-making, planning, organising, ordering, and thinking through
the consequences of things, is a logistical process that draws from the
brain’s executive functioning. Executive functioning is a complex
cognitive process influenced by the prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and the
limbic system. ADHDers can experience a disruption to these processes
that result in them experiencing difficulties with attention, emotional
regulation, and decision-making. This can produce procrastination and
difficulty with keeping up with commitments. Conversely, when an
activity is particularly interesting, a state of hyperfocus can lead to an
inability to stop doing a task and cause one to lose track of time, forget to
eat, and ignore other responsibilities, including self-care.
The following vignette describe the level of overwhelm and fatigue
associated with actioning a task and a stated timeline of either NOW or
NOT NOW.
I have avoided unpacking boxes in the new house. As I consider storage
options and the process of decluttering, I begin to feel overwhelmed by
decision making (e.g., what belongings should be re-homed, how will
I store my items, what is the right waste removal options etc.). My mind
wanders to a meta-analysis of how the house is configured and how
things can be best placed. Each task feels equally important to do. My
attempt to start has resulted in me moving from box to box without
making any progress. Every time I attempt to start this task, I feel
overwhelmed by decision making, I go down rabbit holes of researching
what is the right way for me to go about doing the task, and I feel
paralysed by inaction, and guilty when this pattern repeats. I eventually
experience a state of flow and I will not be able to stop actioning the
task. When I am in a state of ‘NOW’, I will hyperfocus on the task and
all else in my life will likely be neglected whilst I stay on task.
Karly’s vignette below demonstrates how a task of enquiring about
cleaning service impacted her emotionally, physically, and financially.
I decided that I would like to enquire about getting a cleaner to visit my
house. When I attempted to message a cleaning organisation, I was
plagued by ‘what if’ thoughts. For example, ‘What If they ask me to
make a commitment that I cannot keep?’; ‘What if my house is not
suitably organised enough for a cleaner?’. My ADHD mind hyper-
focused on ambiguity, creating an endless loop of unknowns. My level
of distress resulted in me putting down the phone. I began decluttering
by moving items from one room to another. This progressed into going
down rabbit holes of researching storage systems. I will go to great
lengths to be self-sufficient and innovative to solve problems. I become
a jack of all trades. Rather than buying a pre-built storage system, I
decided I could teach myself the skills needed to build a shelving unit.
Whilst I was impressed with my ability to build a shelving unit, my
divergent thinking resulted in me not doing any of the things I needed
to do that week. I felt exhausted and overwhelmed, and I was no closer
to my initial goal of contacting a cleaning service to ask for assistance.
The next section explains how to navigate the emotional regulation
system to avoid the threat and soothing of the cycle of procrastination.
Navigating the Emotional Regulation System
Paul Gilbert’s evolutionary model proposes that human beings switch
between three systems to manage their emotions: the threat, drive, and
soothing systems. Each system is associated with different brain regions
and different brain chemistry (See Figure 4.1).
During a state of ‘threat’, our mindset is directed towards seeking
protection from perceived danger. The threat system can prime our body
with adrenaline and cortisol and contribute to feelings of anxiety, anger,
and/or disgust. The soothing system’s role is to alleviate stress, to bring
about a sense of calm and safeness. The drive system motivates and
energises us to pursue, focus, activate and incentivise. The aim is to move
freely between the three systems according to our needs.
Important factors to consider is your self-talk and method of down-
regulating (e.g., to move out of a stress response) when feeling distressed
or overwhelmed. The following vignette demonstrates how Kevin’s self-
talk and method of soothing eventuated in him feeling stuck between the
threat and soothing cycle of procrastination.
I attempted to start my university assignment, but I began to worry
about not being able to get started. As my stress levels began to rise, I
felt an urge for sugar and carbs. I self-medicated with food, and I felt
disgusted with myself. The overwhelm became unbearable. I began
mindlessly scrolling on social media on my phone. As the hours went
by, I began to chastise myself in a painful cycle of feeling stuck in self-
criticism and shame.
Moving Out of The Stress Response
Once you are aware of these underlying emotional states, you can plan
how you will progress from a state of perceived threat to soothing (e.g., a
method of down-regulating with self-care) to the drive system (to feel
energised and engaged). For example, ‘I will walk to the shops to get a
light, healthy lunch, and when I return home, I will plan to go directly to
the room where my work is set up and get started.’ It is helpful to be
intentional about how you plan to progress from the threat system to
soothing to the drive system (actioning the task).
Figure 4.1
The Three Functions of Emotion: From Gilbert, P., & Simos, G. (2022).
Compassion focused therapy: Clinical practice and applications, with
permission from Routledge. Adapted from Gilbert, P. (2009) The
Compassionate Mind, Little Brown. © P. Gilbert
I know that using my phone as a soothing technique is not effective as
I find it difficult to transition away from my phone within a set amount
of time, and I don’t feel good about myself after using technology.
Conversely, walking my dog helps me feel good about myself, and I can
more easily transition towards taking action on the task at hand. I also
know that it would be helpful if I removed choice from my equation.
For example, if I want to go to the gym, my warmup routine will be to
get dressed in my gym clothes and leave the house within a short
period after waking up to avoid distraction.
Activities that are regulatory, rhythmic, and/or involve movement are
beneficial for completing stress cycles (to help the body move out of
survival mode thinking). Self-compassion, in the form of mindfulness,
can bring about a sense of calm. If your ADHD mind is hyper-focused on
an endless loop of unknowns (i.e., what-if scenarios), you can apply
mindfulness by observing your thoughts without judgment and redirecting
your self-talk. For example, ‘How do I problem solve every anticipated
scenario?’ can be redirected to ‘How can I initiate this task without having
certainty for what is to come?’.
Allowing for accommodations (e.g., visual prompts, reminders, etc.),
may be helpful with task initiation. Artificial intelligence (chat GPT) can
be utilised as a template (that can be edited to your liking) for making an
enquiry, initiating a task, automating workflow etc. There are several apps
that have been designed by ADHDers that seek to create a sense of calm
whilst working through to do lists in an engaging manner.
Body doubling (having another person present whilst you initiate a
task) is a strategy also used by ADHDers. Two examples of body doubling
to initiate the task of cleaning may involve inviting someone into your
home or calling someone and starting a task whilst you are speaking on
the phone.
Once you are in flow, you can use the momentum from initiating one
task to actioning the next task.