 fInducing a
Self-Compassionate Mindset
A
s conceptualised in Buddhist philosophy, Neff (2003a) defined
the three components of self-compassion as self-kindness,
common humanity, and mindfulness. The concept of self-
compassion is an important Buddhist concept that has existed in Eastern
philosophy for centuries. The definition of self-compassion is related to
the more general definition of compassion, which is rooted in the desire
to alleviate suffering and involves pro-social behaviours and caring and
kindness towards others.  In Western psychology, the concept of
compassion is generally conceptualised in terms of compassion for others,
but it is believed in Buddhist philosophy that it is essential to feel
compassion for oneself as you would do for others. This chapter reports
Neff’s research findings on the beneficial effects of treating the self kindly
in times of distress, focusing on the interconnected aspects of experience,
and having the ability to have perspective on negative emotions.
The first component of having a self-compassionate stance requires
that one is kind and understanding towards oneself when failure,
inadequacy, or misfortune is experienced. The ability to view the self with
kindness even in the face of failure or hardship is argued to provide the
safety needed to see the self clearly without fear of self-condemnation and,
therefore, avoiding the need to suppress feelings and also providing a
supportive outlook for growth and change. Truly having compassion for
oneself is defined as desiring health and wellbeing for oneself, which
involves gently encouraging change where needed and rectifying harmful
or unproductive patterns of behaviours. Whilst researching the concept
of self-compassion, Neff found that most people tend to say that they are
less nurturing and harsher towards themselves than they are with other
people. A central component of self-compassion is taking a compassionate
stance towards one’s own suffering, and thus self-compassionate
individuals, by contrast, tend to say that they are as equally kind to
themselves as they are to others. For example, we express concern about
changing a friend’s way of thinking to make them feel better about
themselves, and yet we do not always do this with ourselves when we need
it most.
Jill’s vignette below demonstrates the application of treating the self
kindly.
Jill had offered to make a cake to celebrate her friend’s birthday. Her
ADHD superpowers took hold, and she hyper-focused on cakes all
week, learning how to make the most interesting cake that she could
find. The outcome was a spectacular ten-layered cake. When presenting
the cake, nine out of ten guests were amazed by her creative abilities,
whilst another guest walked out of the room. Jill’s experience of
noticing a guest leaving the room, in combination with feeling
exhausted, had triggered a tsunami of self-critical thoughts. Jill thought
to herself, ‘Why would anyone make a ten-layer cake? You are too
much’. Jill was able to apply self-compassion at this moment by
explaining to the birthday guest that she had a lovely time making the
cake; however, she was feeling overstimulated and needed a sensory
break. As Jill relaxed in the sun, mindfully eating a piece of her cake, the
thoughts dissipated, allowing her to experience the sheer delight of the
delicious cake she had created.
The second component of self-compassion, defined as ‘common
humanity’, proposes that ‘healthy and constructive self-attitudes stem in
part from de-emphasising the separate self, rather than merely building
up and solidifying one’s separate and unique identity’ (Neff, 2003a, p. 96).
The common humanity component of self-compassion is proposed to
allow for the recognition of the related experiences of the self and other,
in which pain and imperfection are acknowledged as an inevitable part of
the human experience, as opposed to isolated occurrences that only
happen to one alone. By focusing on the interconnected aspects of
experience, an individual who is high in self-compassion acknowledges
that all human beings fail and experience pain. Thus, self-compassion is
conceptualised as different from self-pity, in which individuals typically
feel highly disconnected from others. A focus on feelings of care and non-
judgmental understanding that connects the self to others, as opposed to
isolated self-evaluations, is reported to enable an ability to have
perspective on negative emotions rather than suppressing or becoming
overwhelmed by them (Neff, 2005).
Greg’s vignette below of applying the concept of ‘common humanity’,
explains how he progressed from a state of exhausting all of his resources
for coping, to advocating for accommodations.
Prior to receiving a formal diagnosis of ADHD, Greg explained that
his work history was one of a perpetual cycle of ADHD burnout.
Greg advised that when he initially starts at a workplace, people are
often astounded by his ability to problem solve, mentor, systemise
and innovate. Greg advised that it is not long before people come
rushing to him for answers to their unsolved problems. Whilst Greg
is busy putting out spot fires and saying yes to an ever-growing list of
tasks, the insurmountable workload snowballs into one he cannot
keep on top of. In the past, Greg would quit his job due to burnout.
Greg has learnt to apply the concept of common humanity by seeking
support. The employer accommodated this by adding uninterrupted
work time, blocking time to avoid over-scheduling, minimising
marginal functions to allow focus on essential job duties, and offering
sufficient progression opportunities. This was a win-win for Greg
and his employer.
The third component of self-compassion, defined as ‘mindfulness’,
requires taking a balanced approach to our negative emotions so that
feelings are neither suppressed nor exaggerated. Mindfulness requires a
willingness to observe one’s negative thoughts and feelings in a non-
judgmental, receptive mind state of openness and clarity without trying
to suppress or deny them. Neff argues that we cannot ignore our pain and
feel compassion for it at the same time. The skill of mindfulness requires
people to examine feelings without suppressing or becoming completely
overwhelmed by them, thus avoiding the disabling process of over-
identifying with their emotions.
Aleisha’s vignette demonstrates the application of mindfulness, by
redirecting her thinking away from judgement, towards a neutral
exploration of embodied self-awareness.
Aleisha wanted to attend a friend’s event; however, she was feeling
overwhelmed — ‘this feeling is too much, I can’t do this’. Aleisha
compassionately acknowledged the physical sensation of anxiety in her
body without judgment. In order to soothe herself, Aleisha moved
outside and sat with her pet rabbit. When Aleisha felt more regulated,
she recalled her friend having mentioned that the event was being held
in a venue with an outdoor garden. Aleisha made a plan that she would
navigate towards people she felt comfortable with (i.e., to experience
relational safety) whilst enjoying a mindful seat in nature. Aleisha
drove to the event and gave herself permission to leave the event at a
time that felt was right for her.
Empirical Studies that Demonstrate the Protective Qualities
of Self-Compassion
Although the concept of self-compassion is a relatively recent
psychological concept in Western psychology, research suggests that the
three components of self-compassion support healthy self-attitudes and
facilitate resilience and adaptation (Mayer & Salovey, 1997). The potential
benefits of raising self-compassion levels are further supported by
numerous studies in which self-compassion has been linked to positive
aspects of wellbeing, including social connectedness, emotional
intelligence, self-determination, subjective wellbeing, and corresponding
decreases in anxiety, depression, rumination, thought suppression, self-
criticism, and neurotic perfectionism (Neff, 2003b; Neff et al., 2007a;
Leary et al., 2007). Thus, self-compassion is proposed to increase self-
kindness to enable negative experiences to be seen without the loss of
perspective that stems from excessive self-criticism, feelings of isolation
and over-identification with one’s experiences.
Neff and colleagues (2007) proposed that self-compassion is a skill that
facilitates mental health and is most usefully drawn upon as a buffer or
coping strategy in instances of pain, failure, or perceived inadequacy.
Having a compassionate, objective, and mindful perspective is argued to
enable self-compassionate individuals to cope with challenging
circumstances that surpass their levels of self-esteem. Self-esteem is
conceptualised as a state of self-acceptance that is based on feelings of
self-worth, whilst self-compassion is a conceptually distinctive process
that is based on feelings of kindness. Rather than trying to bolster one’s
self-esteem with positive self-evaluations, self-compassion is a healthy
form of accepting one’s shortcomings. Whilst it is important not to
dismiss the positive benefits of self-esteem, research indicates that self-
compassion is an important concept that empirically demonstrates health
benefits beyond those found attributable to self-esteem. Having a self-
compassionate mindset when dealing with instances of pain or failure
may provide its most crucial function when self-esteem fails (Leary et al.,
2007; Neff et al., 2007a).
The following vignette demonstrates how having a self-compassionate
mindset provides benefits above those attributable to self-esteem.
Although Jessica was highly regarded in her workplace, she felt like an
imposter. It was evident that Jessica excelled at connecting with others
and innovating creative solutions, however Jessica felt a sense of dread
at the thought of people finding out that she had fallen behind with her
admin duties. Jessica applied a self-compassionate mindset, by
acknowledging that all people have strengths and weaknesses, and
accepted that it was reasonable to ask for an accommodation and
automate her admin duties.
In summary, treating the self-kindly and an ability to have perspective on
negative emotions, enables negative experiences to be seen without the
loss of perspective that stems from excessive self-criticism and feelings of
isolation (Neff et al., 2007b; Neff et al., 2005).