Mapping Out ADHD Roadblocks
A clinically significant challenge associated with ADHD relates to
executive functions of the brain, including difficulties with
organising, prioritising, and activation of tasks.
This may include difficulties with getting started on tasks and
procrastination. Time blindness results in difficulties with setting realistic
limitations, figuring out how long a task will take, and prioritising and
activating tasks. These concerns result in feeling pressed for time and
getting distressed by to-do lists.
Difficulties with regulating alertness, sustaining effort, and processing
speed may result in taking an extraordinarily long time to complete
certain types of tasks (e.g., life admin tasks) and difficulties with wrapping
up the final details of projects once the challenging parts of one’s work
are achieved. There can be motivational
challenges in relation to engaging in uninteresting tasks, a tendency to
move from one task to another, and achieving below potential due to not
finishing what one starts. Research findings indicate that ADHD
participants report having an interest-based nervous system, in that they
are drawn to tasks that are intrinsically interesting to them and are not
motivated by rewards and consequences (i.e., money or status is not a
primary motivator).
Further concerns include chronic difficulties with focusing attention,
shifting attention, and sustaining attention. This may be experienced as
excessive distractibility and difficulty ignoring the myriad of thoughts,
background noises, and perceptions in the surrounding environment. Conversely, hyperfocus is an intense form of
concentration. Employers are initially astounded by the exceptional
abilities associated with an ability to hyperfocus (including an ability to
problem solve, systemise, and innovate); however, a lack of
accommodation (such as not having access to flexibility in working
arrangements) will likely lead to employee burnout. The duality of ADHD
is described as a de-regulated activity spectrum, ranging between
hyperactivity and symptoms of burnout.
Hyperactivity is often experienced as an internal feeling of emotional
hyperarousal (i.e., difficulty with modulating emotions), restlessness, and
racing thoughts. Social situations can be challenging (as this requires
monitoring oneself, one’s context, and self-regulating action) and may
result in feeling self-conscious and inhibited in social interactions.
Two commonly reported symptoms of ADHD that can lead to mental
exhaustion include choice paralysis and imposter syndrome. Choice
paralyses often present as running through hundreds of scenarios (for
example, what if thoughts about all the possible unknowns). Imposter
syndrome (i.e., the idea of being found out or not living up to one’s
expectations of the self) leads to self-deprecating thoughts, paralyses, and
anticipated shame.
Rejection-sensitive dysphoria is extreme emotional pain that may be
triggered by a sense of failure or rejection. The reported
overwhelming immediacy and intensity of the feelings can cause one to
lose perspective (e.g., becoming overly sensitive to criticism or a minor
slight). ADHDers often go to great lengths to ensure they do not
disappoint people.
William Dodson, a prominent medical expert in the field of ADHD
research, estimates that children with ADHD receive 20,000 more negative
messages by the age of ten, on average. Often, the reality of a neurodivergent
child is a calendar full of appointments (i.e., allied health professionals,
medical professionals, support plans, multi-disciplinary meetings, group
therapy, private lessons, etc.), with studies indicating an increased risk of co-
morbidities (e.g., anxiety, depression, substance use etc.).
Common manifestations of symptoms of ADHD as an adult may
include problems in sustaining education or employment and clinically
significant impacts across multiple areas of functioning (i.e., self-care,
maintaining relationships and managing psycho-social stressors such as
life-admin/finances).