Promoting a Neuroception
of Safety and Connection
T
o best help neurodivergent individuals navigate our world, we
need to create safe spaces. As we have seen in the previous chapter,
specific areas of the brain via neuroception, evaluate an impression
of safety or trustworthiness by detecting features such as body and facial
expressions and environmental triggers (Porges, 2009). In looking
through the lens of polyvagal theory, we can understand that although an
environment may not appear threatening to some people (e.g., a noisy,
busy, brightly lit lecture theatre), the neuroceptive circuits of a
neurodivergent individual may trigger a strong stress response.
Neurodivergent individuals are sensitive in different ways to which
people might generally be triggered into a sympathetic state (i.e., feeling
restless and anxious, increased heart rate etc.). For example, an Autistic
person may be triggered by a sound or unexpected touch. I have an
Autistic mind, and I often stim (i.e., hand flapping) and react with great
fright if a colleague unexpectedly walks past when I am concentrating.
Colleagues have understandably asked me if I have experienced trauma,
as from a behavioural perspective, my startled response appears that I am
frightened by their presence. I explain that my response was not a trauma
response; rather, I am extremely hypersensitive to sound, and when I am
hyper-focusing on my work, an unexpected noise can trigger a
sympathetic state of mobilisation. My partner is very kind, and if he
knows I am working intently, he will quietly enter the room with an
announcement, ‘I am now entering the room’ (which I much appreciate)!
It is commonly reported in the literature that a neurodivergent
individual can present with ‘faulty’ neuroception if the trigger is not
considered a normal response (e.g., my doorbell tends to make me jump
from my chair with fright). I prefer to use the word ‘sensitive’ to
acknowledge that people are sensitive in different ways. For example, a
neurodivergent hospital employee (e.g., an ADHDer employed in the
Emergency department) who has the ability to stay regulated during a
crisis will be better able to perform as a first responder. Conversely, that
same person may struggle to sit still in a meeting that is not intrinsically
interesting. Neurodivergent individuals are likely to be acutely aware of
their differences energetically, physically, emotionally, and mentally, and
their acute sensitivity to sensory experiences and stimuli gives they a
remarkable view of the world.
Neurodivergent people are however susceptible to emotional contagion
(the tendency to absorb, catch, or be influenced by other people’s feelings)
and can distinguish subtle cues that others would not. Professor Tony
Attwood described this as a sixth sense and likened the experience to the
analogy of a negative tone of voice infecting a neurotypical person at the
strength of a cold. In contrast, a neurodivergent individual is infected at
the strength of the flu. This can be an overwhelming experience that can
lead to a hypervigilant, alarmed state.
Co-regulation and Accommodation
When the autonomic nervous system has moved into a dysregulated
dorsal vagal state (shutdown, numbing, disconnection, or dissociation)
or sympathetic mobilisation (mobilisation of fight or flight, survival mode
thinking), a quest for safety can be realised by co-regulation (Dana, 2020).
Co-regulation is defined as how one person’s autonomic nervous system
interacts with another person’s autonomic nervous system to facilitate
connection and safety. This involves recognising a shift in one’s
autonomic state, which is met with a responsive, warm, calming presence
and tone of voice. In order to facilitate co-regulation, you need to honour
the person’s experience (i.e. you are not trying to resolve or escape from
the emotion, instead you are emotionally attuned to meeting them where
they are at).
Shifting ADHDers out of a disorganised fearful state via co-regulation
involves taking the time to consider their feelings and accommodating
them by providing cues of relational safety. Co-regulation is dependent
upon how the person is seen, heard, held and the ways they are offered
safety and connection (Dana, 2020). Co-regulation and accommodation
are essential in promoting a neuroception of safety (Porges, 2009).
Environmental Factors
Environmental factors play a significant role in determining our ability to
regulate our nervous system. For neurodivergent people, this is especially
important. Whilst it is beneficial for an individual to implement a healthy
lifestyle (exercising regularly, eating healthy, achieving good quality sleep,
establishing healthy connections, etc.), an unhealthy environment can
perpetuate a cycle of living in survival mode, leading to the body
becoming under-resourced. For example, when a workplace is too far out
of sync with a neurodivergent individual’s needs (i.e., a lack of
accommodation), life becomes about holding it together, with little to no
baseline left to socialise or enjoy being outside of work hours. When the
sympathetic nervous system works overtime, our body will become
flooded with cortisol and adrenaline. A perpetual state of exhaustion and
an inability to self-care or feel pleasure can weigh you down. Over time,
chronic levels of stress can lead to more serious problems (e.g., burnout,
illness, insomnia, or chronic pain, which an overwhelmed nervous system
can exacerbate).
The autonomic nervous system, including the sympathetic and
parasympathetic branches, helps maintain balance in the body’s
responses. The sympathetic nervous system is responsible for the ‘fight
or flight’ response, which prepares the body for action in stressful
situations. The parasympathetic nervous system counteracts this response
by promoting the ‘rest and digest’ state. The parasympathetic nervous
system is a network of nerves that relaxes your body after periods of stress
or danger. It is also responsible for maintaining life-sustaining processes
like digestion, heart rate and breathing. When your parasympathetic
nervous system is engaged, your physiological system is primed to work
at its best. The expression of inflammatory proteins is diminished, the
expression of stress hormones (i.e., cortisol) is decreased, and we feel
regulated and related (i.e., relaxed, open and present). The
parasympathetic nervous system, by promoting relaxation and reducing
stress, can indirectly support a stronger immune response.
The Workplace
Considerate employers have a collaborative approach to problem-solving
and create environments conducive to a healthy working relationship for
all employees. Humans have a psychological need for relatedness. The
brain detects and evaluates features such as body and facial expressions
and environmental triggers to evaluate an impression of safety or
trustworthiness. People can either be co-regulatory (e.g., share a warm,
calming presence and invite possibility) or reinforce habitual survival
patterns (Dana, 2020). Inclusive workplaces encourage neurodiverse
employees to feel safe enough to discuss their neurobiological needs and
remain open-minded and curious about how best to support the person.
The following vignette describes my personal experience of
accommodating my needs as a psychologist and seeing the opportunities
offered by difference.
I once had a supervisor question me as to how I could possibly cope
as a self-identified Autistic psychologist when people would be
expecting things of me. My supervisor at that time was aware that I
had dropped out of secondary school due to my difficulty with
navigating a mainstream schooling system. When my neurobiological
needs are respected, I believe that my Autistic traits work to my
advantage in my profession as a psychologist. It is true that I struggle
with understanding simplistic explanations of emotions and social
norms. However, that leads me to remain curious. Rather than
assuming I know the answers, I ensure that I solve problems
collaboratively with my clients. My special interest in learning about
neuroscience means that I will read extensively to provide my clients
with a neurobiologically informed approach to treatment. I am a
visual learner, and I ensure that my clients are provided with visual
handouts to help consolidate their learning. I automate and delegate
tasks (i.e., I am so grateful for my IT team, accountant, and reception
staff) that I struggle with. It is also true that I am hypersensitive to
sound, and I suffer from the accumulative effects of functioning in
noisy, brightly lit spaces. Consequently, my clinic space is set up to
provide a sense of calm.