Navigating Meltdowns in
Neurodivergent Children
A
DHD is likely familial, with heritability estimates of 60%–90%. To
support children with ADHD and their families, parents should
have access to the information that they need to make informed
decisions about what they feel is in the best interests of their family. The
successful collaboration of educators, allied health professionals and the
ADHD community (ADHD individuals and their loved ones) has led to a
wealth of early interventions that have demonstrated significant
therapeutic outcomes for neurodivergent children.
Meltdowns in Children
When demands outweigh a child’s ability to cope, meltdowns present as
the autonomic state of a dysregulated dorsal  vagal  state (shutdown,
numbing, disconnection, or dissociation) or a sympathetic state
(mobilisation of fight or flight, or survival mode thinking). This may have
resulted from the combination of a lack of accommodations, sensory
and/or emotional overload, insufficient opportunity to feel diverse
thinking skills are of value, and/or suppressing neurodivergent traits.
Differences in the structure, chemistry, and networks of the ADHD
brain mean they don’t filter information or stimulation in the same way
(i.e., tuning out information), which often leads to overstimulation,
cognitive, emotional, and logistical overwhelm (Plessen et al., (2006);
Volkown et al., 2009). A meltdown is more likely to occur if a
neurodivergent child has exhausted their strategies for responding and
the demands outweigh their ability to cope. A neurodivergent child may
experience a meltdown due to sensory overload, burnout and/or due to
their inability to understand or cope with a situation.
When raising a neurodivergent child, people sometimes unfairly
assume that a parent is being lax in accommodating to their child’s
neurobiological needs, despite scientific evidence confirming that
habituation to sensory sensitives does not occur (i.e., in fact, exposure to
sensory sensitivities for extended periods is likely to increase anxiety and
cause trauma). You can teach a person to repress their emotions and not
react (i.e., they are no longer disrupting anyone); however, you may not
see how much you are hurting the person. They may go home and scream
for hours, have nightmares, physical symptoms (e.g., migraines or IBS
flares), exhaustion (e.g., being incapable of leaving the house and needing
to do nothing except sleep), experience escape ideation (suicidal thoughts,
self-harm), burnout etc. Please be compassionate and do not deny a child
the right to leave a situation if it leads to physical discomfort and/or if
they are exhausted. Just being in a classroom with bright lights, noises,
transitions, etc., can be exhausting.
When a neurodivergent child has faced a distressing situation that
they can not resolve, repeated exposures without intervention may do
more harm than good. You must address the symptoms (with a research-
informed neuro-affirming approach that respects the family’s needs).
Wait to find more workable options and provide coping skills (e.g., a
social story of what is expected) later. Change is a process that requires
preparation (considering developmental and therapeutic gains) and
support (accommodations). The child will likely need intervention
before they can feel calm and comfortable to engage in an activity that
has led them to feel flooded with an emotion in the past. Ultimately, we
want to reduce the likelihood of meltdowns by empowering
neurodivergent individuals to feel comfortable asking for the
accommodations and support they need. To support future generations
of neurodivergent children from experiencing the adverse impact of
burnout, it is important that we move towards a neuro-affirming and
neuro-biologically informed approach that accommodates the level of
the child’s individual needs.
Navigating Sensory Overload Meltdowns with Emotional
Attunement
During a meltdown, while it may appear in the immediate situation that
a child is reacting inflexibly to a request, it is likely an accumulation of
experiences (e.g., an unexpected transition, numerous situations that the
child could not understand because their brain processes things
differently, sensory overwhelm, etc.) that eventuated in the child feeling
that they have used up all of their coping responses in their repertoire,
including seeking help.
Often, the child will be requesting things in the midst of a meltdown.
You will likely escalate the meltdown if you continue to reason with or
make demands of the child. When explaining this, I use the metaphor of
trying to pour water into a cup that is already full. If a neurodivergent
child has reached the point of experiencing a meltdown, ignore the task
at hand. During a meltdown, the child will be unable to respond
appropriately (e.g., reason, reflect, learn) due to a dysregulated brain state.
In the moment, it is crucial to relate to the child with emotional
attunement. Emotional attunement is the ability to recognise, understand,
and engage with the child’s emotional state and respond with appropriate
language (validate the feeling) and behaviours (share a sense of calm and
connection). Emotional dismissal and/or misattunement are crippling for
a neurodivergent child who cannot easily bypass contempt and strongly
need a deep and authentic connection.
Do not constrain the child (unless they are at risk of harm). Provide a
calm environment by reducing sensory stimulation. Limit talking as
words are a form of stimulation. If you cannot provide a calm
environment (e.g. you cannot create silence in a classroom), navigate the
child towards a location or activity that allows them to experience a
sensory break, with a continual focus on emotional attunement. This is
known as the GPS Method. The principle is that a GPS will direct you
where to go next: ‘Now, turn left at the next intersection.’ In such
circumstances, navigate the child toward what to do next by giving them
a sense of purpose or utilising a grounding technique (e.g. feed the
chickens, take an important note to the principal, help return a book to
the library, go for a walk to get a cold drink). For example, say to the child,
‘Let’s take a break and go together to feed the chickens’. The child may try
to pull you back into discussing the problem; explicitly state in a calm,
compassionate tone, ‘I can see you were feeling (angry, sad, etc.). I know
it’s hard. I am here — let’s take a break and go together to feed the
chickens. Physical exercise effectively reduces physiological symptoms
and removes the child from the situation if needed (e.g., skipping to go do
an errand with the child).
Navigating ADHD and/or Autistic Burnout
Burnout  is a consequence of chronic  stress, causing disturbance to
physical (autonomic nervous system) and mental functioning. If a child
is experiencing symptoms of ADHD or Autistic burnout, they may appear
to  regress — becoming less flexible in their thinking and reaching
meltdown more easily — and will present with increased reactivity (e.g.,
behavioural concerns). Please understand that the child’s cup is full, and
the addition of any further stimuli will likely exacerbate a dysregulated
state and likely trigger shame.
While self-care is a particularly important approach for treating
symptoms of burnout (a balanced diet, sleeping, creating opportunities
for being vs. doing, etc.), what is essential for treating Autistic and ADHD
burnout is increasing the level of accommodations to ensure the
environment is more in sync with the child’s individual needs. Activities
that are regulatory, rhythmic, and/or involve movement are beneficial for
completing stress cycles (to help the body move out of survival mode
thinking). Neurodiverse minds need to rest and recharge. There are many
different types of rest, including sensory, creative, emotional, and social
rest. Equitable learning recognises that each person has different
circumstances and bodily needs whilst actioning the allocation of
resources and opportunities needed to reach an equal outcome.
The following vignette demonstrates an educator accommodating in
an inclusive manner that celebrates the student’s sense of embodied self-
awareness.
Johhny, I noticed that you are tapping your pencil on the desk while
listening attentively to my instructions. That is quite a clever technique,
as rhythmic activity helps you regulate. It’s great that you are
instinctively tuning into your natural biological rhythm. As we are in
a classroom setting, the noise is distracting some people, so let’s go
together and choose a fidget toy or get you something to draw on as a
less distracting way of accommodating your needs. It is so wonderful
to have such curious and excited learners in our class.
Promoting a Neuroception of Safety
Neuroception is a subconscious detection of threat and safety. One way
we can support a child in feeling safe at school is to co-regulate. Co-
regulation depends on how the child is seen, heard, and offered a
neuroception of safety — a reduction of cues of danger and the experience
of safety cues via connection (Porges, 2009). Co-regulation is defined as
how one person’s autonomic nervous system interacts with another
person’s autonomic nervous system in a way that facilitates connection
and safety. This involves recognising a shift in one’s autonomic state with
a responsive, warm, calming presence and tone of voice. To facilitate co-
regulation, you need to honour the person’s experience (i.e., you are not
trying to resolve or escape from the emotion; rather you are emotionally
attuned to meeting them where they are). Demonstrating a desire to
understand and an ability to respect the child’s inner world is also
beneficial for influencing social and emotional development (self-
regulation, attachment, and a sense of self).
Embodied self-awareness is also key to navigating the world in a way
that feels safe and connected. One way to support this is to create an
awareness of strategies the child finds effective to down-regulate and/or
concentrate (e.g., drawing to help with concentration, a wobble chair,
fidgets, visual prompts, etc.). Create sensory safe spaces (e.g., a sensory
pod within the classroom) and practices (e.g., a lunchtime club) that allow
children to down-regulate their nervous system. We want to empower
neurodivergent children to embrace their authentic selves and to feel
comfortable asking for the accommodations that they need.
When a child is not allowed a necessary accommodation, it can put
the child at risk of being unsafe (i.e., they are not experiencing a visceral
sense of safety in their body), and/or the accumulative effects can impact
mental and physical wellbeing. The following vignette describes a
neurodivergent child’s experience of navigating a mainstream schooling
system without accommodation.
My functioning within a classroom environment tends to fluctuate due
to neuro-fatigue. This means that on some days I can perform a task,
and on other days, I cannot. I am highly aware of my surroundings
and experience sensory overwhelm. I also tend to notice subtle
emotional cues that others do not (i.e., I absorb other people’s
emotions). I have difficulty processing information in class when a lot
of information is presented orally. Without an option for
accommodating, I become physically and mentally exhausted. When I
communicate that I need space to down-regulate (e.g., I ask to observe
and draw to calm myself), I am told that we need to stick to the group
plan. When the demands outweigh my ability to cope, I experience a
meltdown. Sometimes, I am punished for my behaviour during the
meltdown. It is harmful to me if I reach a crisis point before my need
for a break is accepted. Once I have reached a state of burnout, I have
diminished capacity to cope with daily life, sensory input and/or social
interaction, and I can no longer go to school at all.
We must ensure that school staff are provided with research-informed
evidence to support neurodivergent children who experience meltdowns,
burnout, and demand-avoidance behaviours. This will prevent ineffective
and sometimes harmful advice (repeated negative exposures or
consequences) from being given to families and reduce educator, parental,
and student distress.