Three Common
ADHD Internal Struggles
A
DHDers often describe frustration with where their minds
sometimes lead them. They may spiral into intense internal
struggles from a craving for stimulation that creates conflicting
cognitions around unrealistic expectations. The result is a pattern of
thinking that leads to guilt and further distress as they try to resolve a
drive for more while constantly feeling unsatisfied. These spirals of
thinking can be characterised into three separate types: achieving goals,
social anxiety, and finding existential meaning in one’s life.
The Activation Spiral of Thinking
This spiral creates cognitive dissonance in relation to setting realistic
limitations (amazing ideas vs. what is realistically achievable) in contrast
with to-do lists that cause distress. Time blindness and difficulties with
prioritising and organising may result in chronic stress. When one’s sense
of value is associated with productivity, survival mode thinking may
activate the threat and drive systems.
Learning to be  mindful  of your emotions in a curious and non-
judgmental manner allows you to change how you pay attention to an
emotion and sets the framework for managing distress in a healthy way.
One way of doing this is to ask yourself, ‘Am I thinking my emotion or
feeling my emotion?’ Trying to think your way out of an emotion may
consist of thoughts racing, running through scenarios in a panicked state,
a strong urge to seek reassurance, and/or obsessive thinking about feared
outcomes. Fusing with a thought is when the person considers the thought
to be necessary, dangerous, or saying something about them as a person
(i.e., I don’t feel good enough).
When the mind is under high levels of distress, there may be an
intolerance to uncertainty, perfectionism, excess sense of responsibility
and an overestimation of danger. Intrusive thoughts are catastrophic, in
which a person may imagine the worst feared possible outcome and feel
distressed as if it is happening. The strength of judgement is overused,
and obsessive thinking about feared outcomes develops. Recall that your
ability to reason and/or feel self-assured is impaired when you are
dysregulated. The mind wants to take control and resist this urge. Once
a person is flooded with anxiety, it is important to focus on two things —
self-care (e.g., reducing the physiological sensation of feeling flooded with
emotion) and what will happen next to calm the stress response (e.g., a
sensory break).
The Social Anxiety Spiral of Thinking
This spiral leads to masking, reassurance-seeking, and/or overcommitting
to things. These behaviours are particularly adverse to mental health.
Subjugating (pleasing at the expense of the self) can lead to exhaustion
and guilt. Self-esteem fluctuates in relation to whether the person is
pleasing or gaining reassurance.
Social anxiety stems from an overwhelming fear of being judged
negatively. It may eventuate in a person repeatedly reviewing their
behaviour following a social interaction, focusing on evidence that they
did not do well or made a poor impression. ADHDers may be susceptible
to social anxiety due to executive functioning challenges with emotional
regulation, working memory, and self-awareness. Feelings of inadequacy
and low self-esteem can contribute to social anxiety that may have
stemmed from past experiences of being bullied or rejected as a child.
Two unsettling things that we face in life are people pulling away and
our subconscious urges leaving us in a vulnerable, childlike state.
Subconscious urges have a distinct sense of urgency to them. For example,
we may rationally know that making a mistake as an adult will not lead to
ridicule. However our subconscious mind can trigger unprocessed
emotions from past experiences of being shamed as a child, which can
lead to a fight or flight response (e.g., appeasing and pleasing). A healthy
adult perspective (i.e., schema therapy healthy adult mode) can soothe
the vulnerable childlike state within. Calming strategies can help to centre
the mind and body. Acting authentically (according to your values) and
not holding onto things that are not meant for you (e.g. learning not to
subjugate due to a fear of abandonment or the need to please) can relieve
nervous energy. Embracing the authentic self (e.g., checking in with what
you feel and need at any given moment) fosters a genuine connection
with the self and others.
The Existential Spiral of Thinking
This spiral is about questioning one’s purpose, meaning, and connections
in life. Deconstructing this to the point of feeling lost may lead to
symptoms of sadness and grief.
Existential thoughts are those that focus on the meaning and purpose
of life. They can be positive or negative. When your mind wanders to an
existential headspace (e.g., where do I fit in, what is the meaning of my
existence) it is difficult to focus on the present moment and challenge
unhelpful thinking. Existential thoughts directed on a macro level
evaluate the way human beings act towards one another, nature, and/or
animals. This may be particularly detrimental to a person’s mental health
when they believe that they have used up their responses in their coping
repertoire and develop maladaptive thinking about their plight. For
example, when existential thoughts are directed towards the self in a
punitive way, they have nothing encouraging to say, and there is a sense
of being overwhelmed. This may be further perpetuated by avoidance
behaviours such as disengaging and isolating oneself and/or self-
medicating. The values people hold (e.g., fairness, kindness, curiosity)
tend to match people’s triggers of anger. One of the most substantial
factors in fuelling anger and keeping it going is when attitudes and
expectations clash with the real world (e.g., I need the world to be fair
and just).
Existential thinkers report a distinct difference in which the mind
continues to obsessively return to an existential headspace to question the
overall meaning of life (beyond the individual self), and they report not
being able to find peace without answering this question. Carl Jung once
said, ‘Depression is like a woman in black. If she shows up, don’t shoo
her away. Invite her in, offer her a seat, treat her like a guest and listen to
what she wants to say’.
In my own clinical practice, I have often treated symptoms of an
existential crisis by helping a client to problem-solve how they can find
meaning, connection, and creativity in their individual lives. Clients
frequently report that their day-to-day functioning (concentration, mood,
appetite, sleep etc.) is helped to return to their natural rhythm once this
resolution is achieved.
Existential thinkers acknowledge suffering in the world and imagine a
better way, and thus, existential thinking can lead to growth. The social
advocates of this world play an important role in the future of our society.
I have found that ADHDers tend to be well-informed and will go to great
lengths to help others. They give their time and resources freely, often at
their own expense. They are brave and will frequently be the first
responders when people are in need. Existential thinkers tend to value
the quality of relationships rather than status and competition. The
character strength of transcending provides existential thinkers with
meaning, connection, and creativity.
Finding a Way Out — Fostering Joy and Meaning in Life
through Ikigai
As we can see from the spirals of thought above, while it is important to
allow ourselves to think deeply, it is our experiences that bring us joy in
life and make us feel a state of flow, alive and fulfilled. Ikigai is a Japanese
term that blends two words: ‘iki’ (i.e., to live) and ‘gai’ (i.e., reason) and
translates to reason to live. The concept of ikigai is said to have evolved
from a traditional belief that physical wellbeing is affected by one’s
emotional health and sense of purpose in life. It is a concept that
encourages people to discover what matters to them and to live a life filled
with purpose and joy. To find your ikigai, is to explore what you love,
what the world needs, what you are good at, and what you can get paid
for. Japanese psychologist Michiko Kumano has said that ikigai is a state
of wellbeing that arises from devotion to activities one enjoys while also
bringing a sense of fulfilment. This aligns with cognitive behavioural
therapeutic approaches that emphasise the pursuit of activities that
produce enjoyment and a sense of mastery to alleviate symptoms of
depressive disorder.
Keno Mogi, a neuroscientist and author of Awakening Your Ikigai,
states that ikigai is to involve yourself in a series of actions that result in
the secretion of dopamine, which comes from the rich spectrum of
experiencing moments of joy in life. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that
mediates pleasure in the brain and is stimulated by stimuli such as taste,
smell, sound and the elements of nature. For example, a weekly ritual of
mindfully listening to the sound of hitting a golf ball, having an art space
set up in your house to be creative, and the smell of freshly baked bread
can create ikigai in life by turning actions into pleasurable rewards. Rather
than focusing on one domain of life (e.g. working hard and feeling too
exhausted to enjoy life or advocating for a cause to the point of depletion),
we need a broad range of experiences to enjoy life from a range of sources,
both big and small.