Balancing Emotional and Intuitive Thought Processing
Our brain is a powerful processor of a wealth of inputs from within
and without our bodies. We see, hear, smell, and feel the things
around us, as well as remember our past, imagine our future, and
respond to messages informing us about the state of our major organs via
our nervous system. Complex neural networks within our gut and heart
create their own mini nervous systems and exchange regulatory neuronal
signals with the brain. Some of this processing occurs subconsciously as
our brain constantly monitors and manages a range of basic physiological
functions essential for the maintenance of life.
Because our brain does so much of this ‘automatic’ processing to
enable us to function in our world, we have a lot of time for conscious
thinking about many things, including what we do next. Our brain gives
us the ability to identify patterns, which helps us make sense of the world
and use logic and reasoning to make informed decisions. However, even
this cognitive processing still makes use of the myriad of sensory signals
coming into the brain, thus affecting mood, cognition and behaviour. For
example, when we feel a sudden quickened heart rate, it registers in our
consciousness that something has changed about our current mental and
physical state. Did the heart quicken in response to our cognitions or
some physical action? If we then think about which answer it might be, we
are further influencing those states and the mental processing about them.
We might remember another time when our heart suddenly started
beating faster. This memory may trigger positive or negative thoughts,
leading to further mental processing. All this thinking can get us into and
out of trouble.
If we get stuck in our heads, relying on the cognitive brain alone to
interpret our life experiences, we can get caught in a cycle of thinking
patterns that prevent us from moving forward. The challenge, then, is to
maintain a balanced connection between emotional and intuitive
processing so that our bodies can function optimally and we can make
informed decisions. This helps not just in better decision-making but also
in better mental health and wellbeing.
Emotional processing is all about ‘following our heart’. It centres on a
feeling of deep emotions and values. We may fail to listen to our heart
and pursue things we don’t desire or feel wrong about. It is important to
check in with what feels true to us (i.e., what we want and value) otherwise
we may think of others above ourselves. For example, a feeling of social
anxiety may lead us to self-sabotage (e.g., act in a subservient, approval-
seeking, or self-deprecating way) just to fit in.
Intuitive processing is all about your ‘gut instincts’— a source of self-
protection. This is where our past experiences, urges, and strong feelings
converge. It can offer insights that normal processing may be unable to
comprehend. For example, ignoring our intuition can put us at odds with
our sense of safety or identity (i.e., who we truly are). Intentionally tuning
in to our instincts often requires quietening the mind (i.e., resisting the
urge to continually return to logistical reasoning) and remembering that
our feelings will pass. Instinctive reflections of past patterns can help us
shift towards healthier choices. For example, when we ignore our
intuition, we may not consider intuitive flashes that help guide us to a
more purposeful direction (e.g., trusting that we can move towards a
valued direction in life).
The following vignette depicts an instinctual urge to self-protect whilst
also trusting in one’s ability to be open to connection.
I feel sad and lonely, and I know that I want more social connections
in my life. My instincts tell me to self-protect based on past hurt. As a
child, I believed that being a good person would lead to others being
good in return. That was not the case. I was chronically bullied at
school. My relationships were cultivated based on what others wanted,
and I lost a sense of who I was. I became adept at reading even the
slightest shifts in people’s moods and adjusting my behaviour
accordingly to avoid attracting blame or shame.
I have shifted that paradigm as an adult. I cannot always be responsible
for placating and pleasing others. Logistically, I know that if I am
rejected for being myself or setting healthy boundaries, I have learnt to
hold the line of authenticity (i.e., do what feels right to me) as it
cultivates a true sense of belonging. Happiness is to be accepted for
who you are. As the saying goes, in being uniquely you, the wrong
people will leave the party, and the right ones will join the dance. I now
know that when you are surrounded by healthy people, they will
correct you towards healthy behaviours, they will value your time,
enjoy seeing you succeed and encourage you to nurture yourself. I am
engaging in pursuing my hobbies, and instinctively I feel ready to
connect with people via shared interests.
The following vignette depicts acknowledgement of emotional processing
in pursuing a chosen career path.
My parents convinced me with logistical reasoning to study law.
However, my heart was never truly in it. Over time the resistance to
pursuing something that was not intrinsically interesting to me
resulted in low mood. I became unwell when I tried to suppress my
feelings and engaged in emotional eating as a form of self-medicating.
I connected with a course coordinator who helped me to consider roles
that were more aligned with my heart’s content. I was able to use my
skills to pivot towards mediation training courses, which instinctually
felt more aligned with my interests.
The following vignette exemplifies an emphasis on responding to other
people’s feelings at the expense of oneself.
People say that I am all heart. I am proud of the person that I am. I am
kind and caring, and people generally like me. When I overcommit to
doing things for other people at my own expense, I eventually hit a
wall of burnout. When I realise I have no energy left to meet my needs,
I feel resentment towards people when they do not reciprocate care in
the same way.
The following vignette depicts intuitive processing in decision-making.
When it came time to move out of our share house, my housemate
asked me if we could find another place together. My reasoning told me
that it was not a good idea as I did not feel we were a good fit, and I did
not want to live together again. When it came to having the
conversation and saying no, I felt bad for how the decision was going
to make that person feel. I tried to convince myself that things could be
different, and my body responded with anxiety and stress. My gut was
trying to tell me to protect myself and say no. I listened to my instinct
and reminded myself that my regard for other people does not equate
to always doing what they need. It’s about regarding oneself whilst also
maintaining compassion for others. I am learning to show up for
myself, like I do for other people.
The following vignettes show how mentally processing balanced
emotional and intuitive thought processes leads to confident decision-
making and better wellbeing.
I was experiencing imposter syndrome at the thought of starting a new
role at my workplace. I feared being found out for not knowing
something or making a mistake and people perceiving me as
incompetent. The workplace no longer felt like a safe space. I felt
anxious and overwhelmed. My mind was stuck in a loop of questioning
if I was the right person for the job. When I pivoted away from my
conscious thoughts to allow myself space to process my emotions and
check in with my gut instincts, I knew deep down that I could trust in
my abilities. I may not be all-knowing; however, I am curious and
considered in my approach to learning and excellent at problem-
solving.
My logical reasoning allows me to plan for my wellbeing. I have
incorporated routines that nourish my body and make me feel
energised. My lifestyle includes a mixture of big and little experiences
that bring me joy. For example, I have set up a sewing space in my
house, I occasionally enjoy frolicking in op shops, and I have looked up
creative events that I would like to attend in the coming months. When
my fears are holding me back from engaging in things that feel
personally meaningful to me (e.g., anticipated fears based on self-
doubt), I process my feelings and intentionally consider my gut
instincts. I trust my intuition as a source of experience and
environmental cues of safety. I show up for myself in a compassionate
way that allows me to meet me where I am currently at (i.e., I have
learnt to check in with myself rather than pushing through).
When making decisions, it can be helpful to tease apart instincts from
thoughts and feelings as a practical task:
Step 1: Intentionally tune into your instinctual awareness of what the
next step forward is (i.e., the action).
Step 2: Rationalise how you will go about putting the plan of action
into practice (e.g., think logically about past experiences and
utilise facts as well as logistical planning).
Step 3: Then consider how you feel about actioning the valued
direction. The heart represents feelings, values, desires and
personal connections. How do I feel about this, and how will
this impact others?
It is important to create space for emotions and negative
thoughts in order to process them. Thoughts that stem from
strong emotional processing can overwhelm, often present as
feeling stuck:
•
Avoidance (e.g., procrastination or distraction).
•
Ruminating potential adverse outcomes (e.g., catastrophic
thoughts).
•
Emotional reasoning is a cognitive distortion of jumping
to conclusions based on how it makes you feel (e.g., If I feel
like an imposter thus, I won’t allow myself to learn new
things).
•
Excessive sense of Responsibility
The following vignette demonstrates how one’s values can
influence decision-making:
When I am making decisions, my mind will consider the values I
hold true. I enjoy helping people navigate difficult situations and
adding value. I am good at systemising and finding a better way. I
have an ability to see the big picture, which allows me to pre-
emptively solve any potential problems that may arise. I want to do
right by other people, and I will go to great lengths to consider the
possible impacts of my actions. I feel a sense of responsibility
regarding the sustainability of our environment. Ultimately, I have
a desire to make a positive impact in this world. Whilst I am proud
of the person that I am, I experience tension when my environment
is too far out of sync with these values. For example, rather than
accepting that it is simply not possible for me to be responsible for
the actions of others, I will persist in attempting to solve problems
that are outside of my control whilst under-resourcing my body and
feeling stuck in the process of doing so.
Step 4:
A balanced perspective allows you to consider the rational
analyses, the emotional resonance (e.g., processing difficult
feelings and thoughts that show up), and instinctively move
towards our valued direction (e.g., approaching new challenges,
desired outcomes, task engagement and/or connection).
The following vignette demonstrates wise thinking and
instinctively implementing a plan of action.
Instinctively, I have decided that it is in my best interest to buy a house.
My rational mind tells me that I would need to set aside money each
week to reach my financial goal of saving for a deposit. When I attempt
to do so, I feel like a failure for getting myself into debt. My emotional
overwhelm makes me feel like this goal is out of reach for someone like
me and that I might as well give in and spend my money. To process a
fear of failure, I applied self-compassionate thinking. I reminded
myself that I have learnt what triggered my past behaviour of impulsive
spending, and I have worked hard to be more in tune with my mind.
My gut instinct tells me that the next step forward is to automate direct
deposits into a secure account that I cannot access until I am ready to
buy a house. My wise thinking and instinctual awareness are allowing
me to reach my valued goal.
Exercises to encourage better integration of emotional
and intuitive thought processing
Questions to increase a sense of self-awareness.
•
What is my logistical reasoning telling me (e.g., rational thinking)?
•
Am I feeling caught up in past narratives of self-doubt? If so, it
may be helpful to pursue narrative therapy with a psychologist.
•
What do I feel?
•
Does this feel true to me? Is it aligned with who I am and what I
value?
•
Is the likelihood or impact of how other people may feel (e.g.,
disappointment) incapacitating my ability to show up for
myself? If so, how can I show up for myself whilst remaining
compassionate (e.g., supportively connecting with their emotion
rather than trying to please and appease)?
•
Have I considered what I need? Have I articulated my needs?
•
What are my gut instincts telling me?
•
Am I setting healthy boundaries?
•
If someone has crossed my boundary, am I ignoring my needs or
gut instinct by justifying why they may have treated me that way?
If so, does that feel like a healthy perspective? Do I need to re-
establish my boundaries?
•
Have I prioritised my time and energy to self-invest in doing the
things that I like? If not, consider energy accounting (as
described in chapter 8 of this book).
•
Do I feel incapacitated to make choices based on uncertainty of
what will make the other person feel good? If so, please be gentle
with yourself and acknowledge that you cannot always be
responsible for placating other people’s emotions. They will likely
speak up if they want to explore other options (e.g., what
restaurant we should go to).
Activity
A helpful activity that can allow you to shift between your thoughts,
feelings and gut instincts is to sit and journal.
Step 1.
Write a few paragraphs of the logistics of what has happened in
the past. Where are you currently at with your decision making
and what is your logistical reasoning for doing so?
Example: When I attempt to start a project at work, I am
overwhelmed with thoughts. My thoughts spiral: ‘Am I on top
of things?’, ‘Am I meeting expectations?’ ‘Do I know enough?’,
‘Am I competent and adding value?’. In the past, I would rely on
detached self-stimulator coping modes such as eating sugar and
carbs and scrolling on my phone. Instead, I will think of a self-
soothing activity that energises me (e.g., listening to music), and
I will create distance from my thoughts (e.g., mindful
awareness).
Step 2.
Write a summary of how you are feeling. Also, consider how
your decision-making is influenced by how others may feel.
Example: I fear looking like an imposter and disappointing
people. This sends me back to the drawing board of rethinking
thoughts (e.g., I am trying to think my way out of the emotion
rather than processing how I am feeling). When I realise that I
am bouncing back and forth between my thoughts and feelings,
I allow myself to process my feelings and intentionally move
towards my gut instincts.
Step 3.
Write a summary of what your gut instincts are telling you.
Remember, gut instincts serve to protect you. You will likely
need to intentionally move past your thoughts and emotions
(i.e., processing the feelings and not continually returning to
thoughts of self-doubt or problem-solving the logistics) to reach
your instincts. We need to turn down the noise that can distract
us from what our intuition knows to be true. Thus, in addition
to self-protection, your gut instincts may offer a sense of wisdom
and self-belief (e.g., to trust in yourself that you can do this).
Example: My instincts offer me a sense of trust in myself. I recall
that I am very good at solving problems and tenaciously
achieving despite any difficulties that I encounter.
Metaphorically, when there is a storm of problems that need
solving at work, I am the one who can dance in the rain.