Utilising Evidenced-Based Practices with Neurodivergent Children
In her book Beyond Behaviors, Paediatric psychologist Dr Mona
Delahooke discusses the implementation of a neuroscience research-
informed treatment model that is respectful and inclusive.
Delahooke’s research findings in school settings highlighted a need to
move away from viewing a behaviour as the target, as what you can visibly
see is just the tip of the iceberg. Underneath the waterline, hidden below,
is what has contributed to the behaviour (i.e., what is happening inside the
body and brain that is not visible). The paradigm shift is to view a
challenging behaviour as a signal to something important (e.g., a child’s
body-based and emotional needs), with a compassionate and holistic
approach that promotes a sense of relational safety.
Delahooke states, ‘I no longer work on behaviours. I work on
supporting relationships and nervous systems and looking to the
underlying sources of challenges’. She explains that a child who is
struggling does not necessarily choose to be difficult. Instead, they may be
experiencing a stress response. The first question in this instance is not
how we get rid of this behaviour but rather what the behaviour tells us
about the child’s struggle. Dr Dela Hooke talks about the body budget in
terms of the accumulative impact of layers of stress loading. For example,
the cost of being in the classroom will differ for each student due to
differences in how they process sensory information. A neurodivergent
child moving their body may indicate that they need a higher level of
accommodation, need for relational support (i.e. coregulation) and/or
acceptance. Compassionately checking in with the
child is a key part of understanding what lies beyond behaviours.
Psychologist Ross Green’s Collaborative Problem-Solving model (CPS)
is based on the premise that challenging behaviour occurs when the
demands and expectations being placed on a child exceed their capacity
to respond adaptively (e.g., executive functioning skills, developmental
and self-regulation ability, emotional and sensory processing difficulties).
The model is an evidence-based and trauma-informed model of care.
Doing well is defined differently for each child to ensure that the
classroom is an equitable learning environment. Greene states, ‘Kids do
well if they can’. The CPS model provides a practical framework for
understanding the difficulties of children with behavioural challenges
(e.g., school refusal may be a behaviour of concern that can be traced back
to difficulty with completing an academic task at school) and employs a
curious and empathic approach that engages children (i.e., the children
have a voice and sense of agency). Children are asked what is getting in
their way, and they are proactively involved in solving the problems
affecting their lives.
Without the implementation of a CPS approach, unsolved problems
will remain unaddressed. For example, if a neurodivergent child
struggles to do an essay, applying a behavioural approach (i.e., a model
of either a reward or consequence) will be ineffective for a child with an
interest-based nervous system and executive functioning concerns.
Unsolved problems in this instance may include helping the child to
structure their ideas with a visual support for tasks analysis. Checking
in with the child may have also revealed that they were disengaging and
becoming distressed due to difficulty with processing oral language. A
lot of information in the classroom is presented orally, and in this
instance, it would be helpful to provide a visual schedule and visual
learning strategies.
Greene’s book Lost at School highlights how the CPS model offers a new
conceptual framework for: ‘(1) understanding the factors that set the stage
for challenging behaviour in kids; (2) creating mechanisms for helping these
kids that are predominantly proactive instead of reactive; and (3) creating
processes so people can work on problems collaboratively’.
A Neuro-Affirming Approach
Many neurodivergent children learn to mask their behaviours to fit in
and be accepted due to an unhealthy assumption that neurotypical social
skills are the only way to succeed in life. Masking is not only physically
and emotionally exhausting, but it is also particularly adverse for mental
health (anxiety, depression), self-perception, and self-esteem, and it may
trigger burnout. Insights into psychology have included a move away
from the expectation to meet neuro-normative standard (due to the
clinically significant adverse impact of repression and masking) towards
a mindset of celebrating diversity.
A neuro-affirming approach actively values the contribution of diverse
thinking skills. Allowing students to actively participate in their learning
goals will likely enhance engagement and aid in supporting students with
an interest-based nervous system. Flexibility allows for a recognition that
people think and learn differently. This may include being open to
utilising different programs suggested by allied health professionals to
support individualised learning. It is important that the classroom is
equitable and allows for accommodation to the level of the child’s
individual needs.
The following vignette describes a journey towards self-compassion,
acceptance and pride.
Prior to my diagnosis of ADHD, I had maintained a negative self-image
of being someone who is not able to achieve or live up to their
potential. At best, I was coasting at school due to being intelligent
however I did not feel capable of making things happen. I had trouble
keeping track of schoolwork, staying organised, following directions
and completing homework. When I was overwhelmed, I would freeze
(i.e., shut down) or flee (i.e., not commit to things). This impacted my
self-esteem and relationships. When I did not commit to things, people
thought I was either lazy, stupid, or did not care. I was also more likely
to isolate myself and less likely to try new things. I feel compassion for
my younger self as I now know that ADHD brains function differently,
and I have a beautiful mind. With a newfound understanding of how
to navigate the world in a way that feels in tune with my needs, I have
experienced a great sense of pride and connection. I am contributing
in a way that feels authentic and meaningful to me.
A School-Based Approach
There is an ever-growing evidence base for allowing students to take
ownership of their learning by providing a flexible environment that
fosters innovation and a student’s ability to make formative decisions
based on facts. This is often aided by adaptive learning platforms and
modern forms of education technology to enhance the learning
experience.
Neurodivergent children have a zest for learning and a unique ability
to focus intently on topics they are especially interested in. A childlike
curiosity provides meaning, whether with people, objects, or stimuli.
Creating an educational environment conducive to an ADHDer’s
neurobiological needs involves allowing them to feel a visceral sense of
safety and connection and that their diverse thinking skills are valued.
Peter Hutton is an Australian educational leader renowned for his
transformative insights and dedication to innovative, student-empowered
learning. Hutton founded the Future Schools Alliance to support schools
worldwide and foster collaboration and innovation. Students work in
partnership with their teacher to encourage independence and proactively
take charge of their learning outcomes. Hutton’s approach to student-led
learning with neurodivergent children is seen to empower them through
fostering autonomy, promoting strengths-based approaches and creating
a supportive learning environment.